Great was the feast in Athens that day,
And also the pleasing season of that May
Made every person to be in such delight
That all that Monday they joust and dance,
And spend that day in Venus's noble service.
But because they must rise
Early, to see the great fight,
Unto their rest they went at nightfall.
And in the morning, when day did spring,
Noise and clattering of horses and armor 
There was in hostelries all about,
And to the palace there rode many a company
Of lords upon steeds and palfreys.
There canst thou see preparation of armor
So exotic and so rich, and wrought so well
Of goldsmiths' works, of embroidery, and of steel;
The bright shields, horses' head-armor, and horse-armor,
Gold-colored helms, coats of mail, tunics with heraldic devices; 
Lords in richly decorated robes on their coursers,
Knights of  (their) retinues, and also squires
Nailing heads to the spear-shafts, and buckling helms;
Fitting the shields with straps, fastening with laces --
Where it is needed they were not at all idle;
The steeds frothing on the golden bridles
Gnawing, and fast the armorers also
With file and hammer are spurring to and fro;
Yeomen on foot, and foot soldiers many a one
With short staves, thick as they can go;
Pipes, trumpets, kettle drums, bugles,
That blow bloody sounds in the battle;
The palace full of people everywhere,
Here three, there ten, debating, 
Conjecturing about these two Theban knights.
Some said thus, some said "it shall be so";
Some held with him with the black beard,
Some with the bald, some with the thickly haired;
Some said he looked grim, and he would fight:
"He has a battle-ax of twenty pounds of weight."
Thus was the hall full of conjecturing,
Long after the sun began to rise.
The great Theseus, who was awakened of his sleep
By the music and noise that was made,
Remained yet in the chamber of his rich palace 
Until the Theban knights, both equally
Honored, were fetched into the palace.
Duke Theseus was set at a window,
Arrayed exactly as if he were a god on a throne.
The people press thither full soon
In order to see him, and to do great reverence,
And also to hear his command and his decision.
A herald on a scaffold made a "Ho!"
Until all the noise of people was done,
And when he saw the people all still of noise,
Then showed he the mighty duke's will:
"The lord has of his great sound judgment
Considered that it would be destruction
To gentle blood to fight in the manner
Of mortal battle now in this undertaking.
Wherefore, to arrange matters so that they shall not die,
He will modify his previous plan.
No man therefore, upon punishment of loss of life,
No sort of arrow, nor battle-axe, nor short knife
Send into the lists or bring there;
Nor short sword, to stab with piercing point,
May no man neither draw, nor bear it by his side.
And no man shall ride at his opponent
More than one course with a sharply honed spear; 
Let him thrust, if he wishes, on foot, to defend himself.
And he who is at a disadvantage shall be taken
And not slain, but be brought unto the stake
That shall be placed on either side;
But thither he must (go) by force, and remain there.
And if so happen that the chieftain be taken
On either side, or else should slay his opponent,
The tournament shall last no longer.
God give you success! Go forth and lay on fast!
With long sword and with mace fight your fill.
Go now on your way; this is the lord's will."
The voice of people touched the heaven,
So loudly they cried with merry voices,
"God save such a lord, that is so good
He desires no destruction of blood!"
Up go the trumpets and the melody,
And to the lists rides the company,
In battle array, throughout all the city, 
Hung with cloth of gold, and not with serge.
Fully like a lord this noble duke did ride,
These two Thebans upon either side,
And after rode the queen and Emelye,
And after that another company
One after another, according to their rank.
And thus they pass throughout the city,
And they come to the lists in good time.
It was not yet fully prime (nine a.m.) of the day 
When Theseus was set very splendidly and nobly,
Ypolita the queen, and Emelye,
And other ladies about in tiers.
Unto the seats press all the crowd.
And westward, through the gates under Mars,
Arcite, and also the hundred of his party,
With red banner is entered right away;
And in that same moment Palamon
Is under Venus, eastward in the place,
With white banner and hardy countenance and face.
In all the world, to seek up and down,
So evenly, without variation,
There were not two such companies,
For there was no one so wise that could say
That any one had advantage over the other 
In worthiness, nor in status, nor age,
So evenly were they chosen, as I estimate.
And in two fair ranks they arrange themselves.
When every one of their names were read,
So that in their total number there would be no deception,
Then the gates were shut, and cried was aloud:
"Do now your duty, proud young knights!"
The heralds left their spurring up and down;
Now trumpets and bugles ring loud. 
There is no more to say, but from west and east
In go the spears very firmly in the lance-rests;
In goes the sharp spur into the flank.
There people see who can joust and who can ride;
There splinter spears upon thick shields;
He feels the stabbing through the breast-bone.
Up spring spears twenty foot on height;
Out go the swords bright as silver;
The helms they hew to pieces and cut into shreds
Out burst the blood in strong red streams;
With mighty maces they break the bones to pieces.
He did thrust through the thickest of the throng;
There strong steeds stumble, and down goes all,
He rolls under foot as does a ball;
On his feet he stabs with the broken shaft of his spear,
And he hurtles him down with his horse;
He is hurt through the body and then taken,
Despite all he can do, and brought unto the stake;
As was the agreement, right there he must abide.
Another on that other side is led away.
And for a while Theseus makes them rest,
To refresh themselves and drink, if they wish.
Many times these two Thebans have  
Met together, and (each) wrought woe to his opponent;
Each has unhorsed the other of them two.
There was not any tiger in the vale of Gargaphia, 
When her whelp is stolen when it is little,
So cruel on the hunt as is Arcite
For jealous heart upon this Palamon.
Nor in Benmarin there is not so fierce a lion,
That is hunted, or maddened by his hunger,
Nor of his prey desires so the blood,
As Palamon to slay his foe Arcite.
The fervent strokes bite on their helms;
Out runs red blood on both their sides.
Some time there is an end of every deed.
For before the sun went unto its rest,
The strong king Emetreus did seize
This Palamon, as he fought with Arcite,
And made his sword deep in his flesh to bite,
And by the force of twenty he (Palamon) is taken  
Without having surrendered, and dragged to the stake.
And in the rescue of this Palamon
The strong king Lygurge is born down,
And king Emetreus, despite all his strength,
Is carried out of his saddle a sword's length,
So hit him Palamon before he was taken.
But all for naught; he was brought to the stake.
His hardy heart could not help him:
He must abide, when he was caught,
By force and also by the agreed terms of battle.
Who sorrows now but woeful Palamon,
That must no more go again to fight?
And when Theseus had seen this sight,
Unto each one of the folk that fought thus 
He cried, "Stop! no more, for it is done!  
I will be true judge, and no partisan.
Arcite of Thebes shall have Emelye,
Who by his fortune has won her fairly."
Immediately there is a noise of people begun
For joy of this, so loud and clamorous indeed
It seemed that the lists should fall.
What now can fair Venus do above?
What says she now? What does this queen of love,
But weeps so, for lack of (having) her will,
Until her tears fell in the lists? 
She said, "I am disgraced, doubtless."
Saturn said, "Daughter, hold thy peace!
Mars has his will, his knight has all his request,
And, by my head, thou shalt be relieved soon."
The trumpeters, with the loud music,
The heralds, who full loudly yell and cry,
Are in their happiest state for joy of dan Arcite.
But listen to me, and stop the noise for a little,
(Hear) what a miracle at once befell there.
This fierce Arcite has taken off his helm,
And on a war horse, to show his face,
He spurs from one end to the other of the large open space
Looking upward upon this Emelye;
And she to him cast a friendly eye
(For women, so to speak in general,
They all follow the favor of Fortune)
And was all his source of pleasure, in his heart.
Out of the ground leaped an infernal fury,
Sent from Pluto at the request of Saturn,
For which his horse for fear began to turn,
And leaped aside, and stumbled as he leaped;
And before Arcite can take heed,
He hit himself on the top of his head,
That in the place he lay as if he were dead,
His breast shattered by his saddlebow.
He lay as black as any coal or crow,
The blood was so run in his face.
Immediately he was carried out of the place,
With painful heart, to Theseus's palace.
Then was he cut out of his armor
And brought in a bed very gently and quickly,
For he was yet conscious and alive,
And always crying for Emelye.
Duke Theseus, with all his company,
Is come home to Athens, his city,
With all bliss and great solemnity.
Although this accident had happened,
He would not distress them all.
People said also that Arcite shall not dye;
He shall be healed of his injuries.
And of another thing they were as happy,
That of them all there was no one slain,
Although they (were) sorely hurt, and especially one,
Whose breastbone was pierced by a spear.
To other wounds and to broken arms
Some had salves, and some had charms;
Medicines made of herbs, and also of sage
They drank, for they wanted to have their limbs cured.
For which this noble duke, as he well knows how,
Comforts and honors every man,
And made revel all the long night
For the foreign lords, as was right.  
Nor was it considered any defeat (in battle)
But (only) as a joust or a tournament;
For truly there was no defeat.
For falling is nothing but an accident,
Nor to be led by force unto the stake
Without having surrendered, and taken by twenty knights,
One person alone, without others,
And dragged forth by arm, foot, and toe,
And also his steed driven forth with staves
By men on foot, both yeomen and also foot soldiers --
He incurred no shameful blame for it; 
No man there may call it cowardice.
For which anon duke Theseus had proclaimed,
To put a stop to all rancor and ill-will,
The victory (is given) as well to one side as to the other,
And either side equal as the other's brother; 
And gave them gifts in accordance with their ranks,
And held a feast for fully three days,
And honorably escorted the kings 
Out of his town a full day's journey.
And home went every man the direct way.
There was no more but "Fare well, have good day!"
Of this battle I will write no more,
But speak of Palamon and of Arcite.
The breast of Arcite swells, and the pain
At his heart increases more and more.
The clotted blood, despite any medical treatment,
Corrupts, and is left in the trunk of his body,
That neither blood letting at a vein, nor applying suction cups,
Nor drink of herbs can be any help to him.
The power expulsive (to expel fluids), or animal,
From that power called natural
Can not remove nor expel the poison.
The pipes of his lungs began to swell,
And every muscle down in his breast
Is destroyed by poison and corrupted matter.
Avails him neither, to preserve his life,
Vomit upward, nor downward laxative.
All is shattered in that region;
Nature now has no power to control. 
And certainly, where Nature will not work,
Fare well medicine! Go bear the man to church!
This is the whole of it, that Arcite must die;
For which he sends after Emelye,
And Palamon, who was his dear cousin.
Then said he thus, as you shall after hear:
"The woeful spirit in my heart can not
Declare one small part of all my painful sorrows
To you, my lady, whom I love most,
But I bequeath the service of my ghost
To you above every creature,
Since my life can no longer endure.
Alas, the woe! Alas, the strong pains,
That I have suffered for you, and so long!
Alas, the death! Alas, my Emelye!
Alas, separation of our company!
Alas, my heart's queen! Alas, my wife,
My heart's lady, ender of my life!
What is this world? What do people ask to have?
Now with his love, now in his cold grave
Alone, without any company.
Fare well, my sweet foe, my Emelye!
And softly take me in your two arms,
For love of God, and listen to what I say.
"I have here with my cousin Palamon
Had strife and rancor many a day ago
For love of you, and for my jealousy.
And as Jupiter may guide my soul,
To speak specifically of a servant (of love),
With all the attendant attributes truly --
That is to say, truth, honor, knighthood,
Wisdom, humbleness, rank, and noble ancestry,
Nobility of character, and all that belongs to that art --
As Jupiter may have concern for my soul,
In this world right now I know no one
So worthy to be loved as Palamon,
Who serves you, and will do so all his life.
And if ever you shall be a wife,   
Forget not Palamon, the gentle man."
And with that word his speech began to fail,
For from his feet up to his breast had come
The cold of death, which had overcome him,
And yet moreover, for in his two arms 
The vital strength is lost and all gone.
Only the intellect, nothing else,
That dwelled in his heart sick and sore,
Began to fail when the heart felt death.
His two eyes grew dark, and his breath failed,
But on his lady yet he cast his eye;
His last word was, "Mercy, Emelye!"
His spirit changed house and went where,
Since I came never (there), I can not tell where.
Therefore I stop; I am no theologian;
I find nothing about souls in this register,  
Nor do I wish to tell such beliefs  
Of them, though they write of where they (the souls) dwell.
Arcite is cold, may Mars guide his soul!
Now will I speak forth of Emelye.
Emelye shrieked, and Palamon howls,
And Theseus immediately took his sister 
Swooning, and carried her away from the corpse.
What helps it to waste the whole day
To tell how she wept both evening and morning?
For in such cases women have such sorrow,
When their husbands are gone from them,
That for the most part they so sorrow,
Or else fall in such illness
That at the last certainly they die.
Infinite are the sorrows and the tears
Of old folk and folk of tender years
In all the town for the death of this Theban.
For him there weep both child and man;
There was no such great weeping, certainly,
When Hector was brought, just recently slain,
To Troy. Alas, the lamentation that was there,
Scratching of cheeks, also tearing of hair.
"Why wouldst thou be dead," these women cry,
"Since thou haddest gold enough, and Emelye?"
No man might comfort Theseus,
Except for his old father Egeus,
Who knew the changes of this world,
As he had seen it change both up and down,
Joy after woe, and woe after gladness,
And showed them examples and comparisons.
"Right as there died never a man," said he,
"Who did not live in earth to some extent
Just so there lived never a man," he said,
"In all this world, who some time did not die.
This world is nothing but a thoroughfare full of woe,
And we are pilgrims, passing to and fro.
Death is an end of every worldly pain."
And beyond all this yet he said much more
To this effect, full wisely to exhort
The people that they should comfort themselves. 
Duke Theseus, with all his careful attention,
Considered now where the tomb
Of good Arcite may best be made,
And also most honorable in (regard to) his rank.
And at the last he concluded
That there where first Arcite and Palamon
Had the battle between them for love,
That in that same grove, sweet-smelling and green, 
Where he had his amorous desires,
His lament, and for love his hot fires,
He would make a fire in which the rite
Of a funeral he might fully perform.
And he ordered immediately to hack and hew
The old oaks, and lay them in a row
In piles arranged to burn well.
His officers with swift feet they run
And ride quickly at his commandment.
And after this, Theseus has sent
For a bier, and it all overspread
With cloth of gold, the richest that he had.
And of the same material he clad Arcite;
Upon his hands he had white gloves,
Also on his head a crown of green laurel,
And in his hand a sword full bright and keen.
He laid him, with the face bare, on the bier;
Therewith he wept that it was a pity to hear.
And in order that all the people should see him,
When it was day, he brought him to the hall,
That resounds with the crying and the sound.
Then came this woeful Theban Palamon,
With waving beard and rough hair sprinkled with ashes,
In black clothes, all sprinkled with tears;  
And, excelling others in weeping, Emelye,
The most pitiful of all the company.
In order that the ritual should be
The more noble and rich in its degree,
Duke Theseus had three steeds brought forth,
That were equipped with trappings of steel all glittering,
And covered with the coat of arms of Don Arcite.
Upon these steeds, that were large and white,
There sat folk, of which one carried his (Arcite's) shield,
Another held his spear upright in his hands,  
The third carried with him his Turkish bow
(Of pure gold was the quiver and also the fittings);
And they rode forth slowly with sorrowful demeanor
Toward the grove, as you shall later hear.
The noblest of the Greeks that were there 
Carried the bier upon their shoulders,
With slow pace and eyes red and wet,
Throughout the city by the main street,
Which was all spread with black, and wonderfully high
The street is covered with exactly the same.
Upon the right hand went old Egeus,
And on that other side duke Theseus,
With vessels of pure gold in their hands,
All full of honey, milk, and blood, and wine;
Also Palamon, with a very large company;
And after that came woeful Emelye,
With fire in hand, as was at that time the custom,
To do the office of funeral service.
Much labor and full great preparation 
Was at the service and the fire-making,
Which with its green top reached the heaven;
And twenty fathom of breadth the sides stretched --
This is to say, the boughs were so broad.
There was first laid very many a load of straw.
But how the fire was made on high,
Nor also the names that the trees are called,
Such as oak, fir, birch, aspen, alder, holm oak, poplar,
Willow, elm, plane, ash, box, chestnut, linden, laurel,
Maple, thorn, beech, hazel, yew, dogwood --
How they were cut down shall not be told by me;
Nor how the gods ran up and down,
Disinherited of their habitation,
In which they dwelt in rest and peace,
Nymphs, fawns and hamadryades (wood nymphs);
Nor how the beasts and the birds all
Fled for fear, when the wood was cut down;
Nor how frightened by the light was the ground,
Which was not accustomed to see the bright sun;
Nor how the fire was laid first with straw,
And then with dry branches cut in thirds,
And then with green wood and mixtures of spices,
And then with cloth of gold and with precious stones
And garlands, hanging with full many a flower;
The myrrh, the incense, with such great fragrance;
Nor how Arcite lay among all this,
Nor what richness about his body is;
Nor how Emelye, as was the custom,
Lighted the fire of funeral service;
Nor how she swooned when men made the fire,
Nor what she spoke, nor what was her desire;
Nor what jewels men threw in the fire,
When the fire was great and burned fast;
Nor how some threw their shields, and some their spears,
And of their vestments, which they wore,
And cups full of wine, and milk, and blood,
Into the fire, that burned as if it were mad;
Nor how the Greeks, with a huge company,
Thrice ride all the fire about
Upon the left hand, with a loud shouting,
And thrice with their spears clattering;
And thrice how the ladies did cry;
And how Emelye was led homeward;
Nor how Arcite is burned to cold ashes;
Nor how that wake was held  
All that same night; nor how the Greeks play
The funeral games I care not to say
Who wrestles best, naked with oil anointed,
Nor who bore him best, in any difficulty.
I will not tell also how they go
Home to Athens, when the games are done;
But shortly to the point then I will go
And make an end of my long tale.
By the course of events and by length of a certain number of years,
All stopped is the mourning and the tears
Of the Greeks, by one general assent.
Then it seemed to me there was a parliament
At Athens, upon certain topics and cases;
Among which topics was discussed (a proposal)
To have alliance with certain countries,
And have fully the submission of the Thebans.
For which this noble Theseus immediately
Ordered (someone) to send for gentle Palamon,
Unknown by him (Palamon) what was the cause and why,
But in his black clothes sorrowfully
He came at his (Theseus's) commandment in haste.
Then Theseus sent for Emelye.
When they were set, and all the place was hushed,
And Theseus had waited for a while
Before any word came from his wise breast,
He set his eyes where his object of desire was.
And with a sad face he sighed softly,
And after that exactly thus he pronounced his decision:
"The First Mover of the First Cause above,
When he first made the faire chain of love,
Great was the effect, and noble was his plan.
Well knew he why, and what thereof he meant,
For with that faire chain of love he bound
The fire, the air, the water, and the land
In definite bounds, from which they may not flee.
That same Prince and that Mover," said he,
"Has established in this wretched world below
Specific (numbers of) days and  (term of) duration
To all that is engendered in this place,
Beyond the which day they can not pass,
Although they may yet well shorten those days.
There is no need to cite any written authority,
For it is proven by experience,
Unless I wish to make my meaning more clear.
Then one can by this order well discern
That that same Mover is stable and eternal.
Well may one know, unless it be a fool,
That every part derives from its whole,
For nature has not taken its beginning
Of no part or portion of a thing,
But of a thing that is complete and stable,
Descending (from that) until it becomes corruptible.
And therefore, by his wise foresight,
He has so well established his plan
That types of being and natural processes
Shall endure (for a set time) one after another,
And not eternally, without any lie.
This thou canst understand and plainly see.
"Lo the oak, that is so slow to mature,
From the time that it first begins to spring,
And has so long a life, as we may see,
Yet at the last the tree is wasted away.
"Consider also how the hard stone
Under our feet, on which we tread and go,
Eventually it is worn away as it lies by the way.
The broad river sometimes grows dry;
We see the great cities grow weak and pass away.
Then you can see that all things have an end.
"Of man and woman also we see well 
That by necessity, in one of these two periods of time --
This is to say, in youth or else in age --
He must be dead, the king as must a servant boy;
One in his bed, one in the deep sea,
One in the large field, as people can see;
Nothing helps there; all goes that same way.
Then may I say that all things must die.
"What causes this but Jupiter, the king,
Who is prince and cause of all things,
Causing all to return to its own origin
From which it is derived, to tell the truth?
And against this no living creature,
Of any rank, is helped by striving.
"Then is it wisdom, as it seems to me,
To make virtue of necessity,
And take it well what we may not escape,
And namely that which is due to us all.
And whoever complains in any way, he does folly,
And is rebel to Him that can rule all.
And certainly a man has most honor
To die in his (time of) excellence and flower,
When he is sure of his good name;
Then he has not done his friend, nor himself, any shame.
And his friend ought to be more pleased with his death,
When his breath is yielded up with honor,
Than when his name is faded because of age,
For all forgotten is his knightly prowess.
Then is it best, for a worthy fame,
To die when he has the most fame.
"The contrary of all this is willfulness.
Why do we complain, why do we have sadness,
That good Arcite, flower of chivalry,
Is departed with all due honor
Out of this foul prison of this life?
Why do his cousin and his wife complain here
Of the welfare of him, who loved them so well?
Can he show them his gratitude? Nay, God knows, not a bit;
They offend both his soul and themselves as well,
And as yet they may not change their desires.
"What  can I conclude of this long argument,
But after woe I advise us to be merry
And thank Jupiter for all his grace?
And before we depart from this place
I advise that we make of two sorrows 
One perfect joy, lasting evermore.
And look now, where most sorrow is herein,
There will we first amend and begin.
"Sister," said he, "this is my full intention,
With all the advice of my parliament here,
That gentle Palamon, your own knight,
Who serves you with will, heart, and might,
And ever has done so since you first knew him,
That you shall of your grace have pity upon him,
And take him for husband and for lord.
Lend me your hand, for this is our decision.
Let your womanly pity now be seen.
He is a king's brother's son, indeed;
And even if he were a poor young knight,
Since he has served you so many a year,
And has had for you such great adversity,
It must be taken in account, believe me,
For gentle mercy ought to prevail over justice."
Then said he thus to Palamon the knight:
"I suppose little preaching is needed here
To make you assent to this thing.
Come near, and take your lady by the hand."
Between them was made right away the bond
That is called matrimony or marriage,
By all the council and the baronage.
And thus with all bliss and festivity
Palamon has wedded Emelye.
And God, who has made all this wide world,
Send him his love who has dearly paid for it;
For now is Palamon in complete happiness,
Living in bliss, in riches, and in health,
And Emelye loves him so tenderly,
And he serves her so gently,
That never was there any word between them 
Of jealousy or any other vexation.
Thus ends Palamon and Emelye;
And God save all this fair company! Amen.
When April with its sweet-smelling showers
Has pierced the drought of March to the root,
And bathed every vein (of the plants) in such liquid
By which power the flower is created;
When the West Wind also with its sweet breath,
In every wood and field has breathed life into 
The tender new leaves, and the young sun
Has run half its course in Aries,
And small fowls make melody,
Those that sleep all the night with open eyes
(So Nature incites them in their hearts),
Then folk long to go on pilgrimages,
And professional pilgrims to seek foreign shores,
To distant shrines, known in various lands;
And specially from every shire's end
Of England to Canterbury they travel,
To seek the holy blessed martyr,
Who helped them when they were sick.
It happened that in that season on one day,
In Southwark at the Tabard Inn as I lay
Ready to go on my pilgrimage
To Canterbury with a very devout spirit,
At night had come into that hostelry
Well nine and twenty in a company
Of various sorts of people, by chance fallen
In fellowship, and they were all pilgrims,
Who intended to ride toward Canterbury.
The bedrooms and the stables were spacious,
And we were well accommodated in the best way.
And in brief, when the sun was (gone) to rest,
I had so spoken with everyone of them 
That I was of their fellowship straightway,
And made agreement to rise early,
To take our way where I (will) tell you.
But nonetheless, while I have time and opportunity,
Before I proceed further in this tale,
It seems to me in accord with reason
To tell you all the circumstances
Of each of them, as it seemed to me,
And who they were, and of what social rank,
And also what clothing that they were in;
And at a knight then will I first begin.
A KNIGHT there was, and that (one was) a worthy man,
Who from the time that he first began
To ride out, he loved chivalry,
Fidelity and good reputation, generosity and courtesy.
He was very worthy in his lord's war,
And for that he had ridden, no man farther,
As well in Christendom as in heathen lands,
And (was) ever honored for his worthiness;
He was at Alexandria when it was won.
He had sat very many times in the place of honor,
Above (knights of) all nations in Prussia;
He had campaigned in Lithuania and in Russia,
No Christian man of his rank so often.
Also he had been in Grenada at the siege 
Of Algeciras, and had ridden in Morocco.
He was at Ayash and at Atalia,
When they were won, and in the Mediterranean
He had been at many a noble expedition.
He had been at fifteen mortal battles,
And fought for our faith at Tlemcen
Three times in formal duels, and each time slain his foe.
This same worthy knight had also been 
At one time with the lord of Balat
Against another heathen in Turkey;
And evermore he had an outstanding reputation
And although he was brave, he was prudent,
And of his deportment as meek as is a maid.
He never yet said any rude word
In all his life unto any sort of person.
He was a truly perfect, noble knight.
But to tell you of his clothing,
His horses were good, but he was not gaily dressed.
He wore a tunic of coarse cloth 
All stained (with rust) by his coat of mail,
For he was recently come (back) from his expedition,
And went to do his pilgrimage.
With him there was his son, a young SQUIRE,
A lover and a lively bachelor,
With locks curled as if they had been laid in a curler.
He was twenty years of age, I guess.
Of his stature he was of moderate height,
And wonderfully agile, and of great strength.
And he had been for a time on a cavalry expedition
In Flanders, in Artois, and Picardy,
And conducted himself well, for so little a space of time,
In hope to stand in his lady's good graces.
He was embroidered, as if it were a mead
All full of fresh flowers, white and red.
Singing he was, or fluting, all the day;
He was as fresh as is the month of May.
His gown was short, with long and wide sleeves.
He well knew how to sit on horse and handsomely ride.
He knew how to make songs and well compose (the words),
Joust and also dance, and well draw and write.
He loved so passionately that at nighttime
He slept no more than does a nightingale.
Courteous he was, humble, and willing to serve,
And carved before his father at the table.
He (the Knight) had A YEOMAN and no more servants 
At that time, for it pleased him so to travel,
And he (the yeoman) was clad in coat and hood of green.
A sheaf of peacock arrows, bright and keen,
He carried under his belt very properly
(He well knew how to care for his equipment as a yeoman should;
His arrows did not fall short because of drooping feathers),
And in his hand he carried a mighty bow.
He had a close-cropped head, with a brown face.
He well knew all the practice of woodcraft.
He wore an elegant archer's wrist-guard upon his arm,
And by his side a sword and a small shield,
And on that other side an elegant dagger
Well ornamented and sharp as the point of a spear;
A Christopher-medal of bright silver on his breast.
He carried a horn, the shoulder strap was green;
He was a forester, truly, as I guess.
There was also a Nun, a PRIORESS,
Who was very simple and modest in her smiling;
Her greatest oath was but by Saint Loy;
And she was called Madam Eglantine.
She sang the divine service very well,
Intoned in her nose in a very polite manner;
And she spoke French very well and elegantly,
In the manner of Stratford at the Bow,
For French of Paris was to her unknown.
At meals she was well taught indeed;
She let no morsel fall from her lips,
Nor wet her fingers deep in her sauce;
She well knew how to carry a morsel (to her mouth) and take good care
That no drop fell upon her breast.
Her greatest pleasure was in good manners.
She wiped her upper lip so clean
That in her cup there was seen no tiny bit 
Of grease, when she had drunk her drink.
She reached for her food in a very seemly manner.
And surely she was of excellent deportment,
And very pleasant, and amiable in demeanor,
And she took pains to imitate the manners
Of court, and to be dignified in behavior,
And to be considered worthy of reverence.
But to speak of her moral sense,
She was so charitable and so compassionate
She would weep, if she saw a mouse
Caught in a trap, if it were dead or bled.
She had some small hounds that she fed
With roasted meat, or milk and fine white bread.
But sorely she wept if one of them were dead,
Or if someone smote it smartly with a stick;
And all was feeling and tender heart.
Her wimple was pleated in a very seemly manner,
Her nose well formed, her eyes gray as glass,
Her mouth very small, and moreover soft and red.
But surely she had a fair forehead;
It was almost nine inches broad, I believe;
For, certainly, she was not undergrown.
Her cloak was very well made , as I was aware.
About her arm she bore of small coral 
A set of beads, adorned with large green beads,
And thereon hung a brooch of very bright gold,
On which there was first written an A with a crown,
And after "Love conquers all."
She had another NUN with her,
Who was her secretary, and three priests.
There was a MONK, an extremely fine one,
An outrider (a monk with business outside the monastery), who loved hunting,
A virile man, qualified to be an abbot.
He had very many fine horses in his stable,
And when he rode, one could hear his bridle
Jingle in a whistling wind as clear
And also as loud as does the chapel belle
Where this lord was prior of the subordinate monastery.
The rule of Saint Maurus or of Saint Benedict --
Because it was old and somewhat strict
This same Monk let old things pass away,
And followed the broader customs of modern times.
He gave not a plucked hen for that text
That says that hunters are not holy men,
Nor that a monk, when he is heedless of rules,
Is like a fish that is out of water --
This is to say, a monk out of his cloister.
But he considered that same text not worth an oyster;
And I said his opinion was good.
Why should he study and make himself crazy,
Always to pore upon a book in the cloister,
Or work with his hands, and labor,
As Augustine commands? How shall the world be served?
Let Augustine have his work reserved to him!
Therefore he was indeed a vigorous horseman:
He had greyhounds as swift as fowl in flight;
Of tracking and of hunting for the hare
Was all his pleasure, by no means would he refrain from it.
I saw his sleeves lined at the hand
With squirrel fur, and that the finest in the land;
And to fasten his hood under his chin,
He had a very skillfully made pin of gold;
There was an elaborate knot in the larger end.
His head was bald, which shone like any glass,
And his face did too, as if he had been rubbed with oil.
He was a very plump lord and in good condition;
His eyes were prominent, and rolling in his head,
Which gleamed like a furnace under a cauldron;
His boots supple, his horse in excellent condition.
Now certainly he was a handsome ecclesiastical dignitary;
He was not pale as a tormented spirit.
A fat swan loved he best of any roast.
His saddle horse was as brown as is a berry.
There was a FRIAR, a pleasure-loving and merry one,
A limiter (with an assigned territory), a very solemn man.
In all the four orders of friars is no one that knows
So much of sociability and elegant speech.
He had made very many a marriage
Of young women at his own cost.
He was a noble supporter of his order.
Very well beloved and familiar was he
With landowners every where in his country,
And also with worthy women of the town;
For he had power of confession,
As he said himself, more than a parish priest,
For he was licensed by his order.
He heard confession very sweetly,
And his absolution was pleasant:
He was a lenient man in giving penance,
Where he knew he would have a good gift.
For to give to a poor order (of friars)
Is a sign that a man is well confessed;
For if he gave, he (the friar) dared to assert,
He knew that a man was repentant;
For many a man is so hard in his heart,
He can not weep, although he painfully suffers.
Therefore instead of weeping and prayers
One may give silver to the poor friars.
His hood was always stuffed full of knives
And pins, to give to fair wives.
And certainly he had a merry voice:
He well knew how to sing and play on a rote (string instrument);
He absolutely took the prize for reciting ballads.
His neck was white as a lily flower;
Furthermore he was strong as a champion fighter.
He knew the taverns well in every town
And every innkeeper and barmaid
Better than a leper or a beggar-woman,
For unto such a worthy man as he
It was not suitable, in view of his official position,
To have acquaintance with sick lepers.
It is not respectable; it can not be profitable,
To deal with any such poor people,
But all with rich people and sellers of victuals.
And every where, where profit should arise,
He was courteous and graciously humble;
There was no man anywhere so capable (of such work).
He was the best beggar in his house;
[And he gave a certain fee for his grant (of begging rights);
None of his brethren came there in his territory;]
For though a widow had not a shoe,
So pleasant was his "In the beginning,"
Yet he would have a farthing, before he went away.
His total profit was much more than his proper income.
And he knew how to frolic, as if he were indeed a pup.
He knew how to be much help on days for resolving disputes,
For there he was not like a cloistered monk
With a threadbare cope, like a poor scholar,
But he was like a master of arts or a pope.
Of wide (expensive) cloth was his short cloak,
Which was round as a bell fresh from the clothespress.
Somewhat he lisped, for his affectation,
To make his English sweet upon his tongue;
And in his harping, when he had sung,
His eyes twinkled in his head exactly
As do the stars in the frosty night.
This worthy friar was called Huberd.
There was a MERCHANT with a forked beard,
Wearing parti-colored cloth, and proudly he sat on his horse;
Upon his head (he wore a) Flemish beaver hat,
His boots were buckled handsomely and elegantly.
His opinions he spoke very solemnly,
Concerning always the increase of his profits.
He wanted the sea to be guarded at all costs
Between Middelburgh (Holland) and Orwell (England).
He well knew how to deal in foreign currencies.
This worthy man employed his wit very well:
There was no one who knew that he was in debt,
He was so dignified in managing his affairs
With his buying and selling and with his financial deals.
Truly, he was a worthy man indeed,
But, to say the truth, I do not know what men call him.
There was also a CLERK (scholar) from Oxford,
Who long before had begun the study of logic.
His horse was as lean as is a rake,
And he was not very fat, I affirm,
But looked emaciated, and moreover abstemious.
His short overcoat was very threadbare,
For he had not yet obtained an ecclesiastical living,
Nor was he worldly enough to take secular employment.
For he would rather have at the head of his bed
Twenty books, bound in black or red,
Of Aristotle and his philosophy
Than rich robes, or a fiddle, or an elegant psaltery. 
But even though he was a philosopher,
Nevertheless he had but little gold in his strongbox;
But all that he could get from his friends,
He spent on books and on learning,
And diligently did pray for the souls 
Of those who gave him the wherewithal to attend the schools.
He took most care and paid most heed to study.
He spoke not one word more than was needed,
And that was said with due formality and respect,
And short and lively and full of elevated content;
His speech was consonant with moral virtue,
And gladly would he learn and gladly teach.
A SERGEANT OF THE LAW (high-ranking attorney), prudent and wise,
Who often had been at the Porch of St. Paul's (where lawyers gather)
Was also there, very rich in superior qualities.
He was judicious and of great dignity --
He seemed such, his words were so wise.
He was very often a judge in the court of assizes,
By royal appointment and with full jurisdiction.
For his knowledge and for his excellent reputation,
He had many grants of yearly income.
There was nowhere so great a land-buyer:
In fact, all was unrestricted possession to him;
His purchasing could not be invalidated.
There was nowhere so busy a man as he, 
And yet he seemed busier than he was.
He had in Year Books all the cases and decisions
That from the time of king William have occurred.
Furthermore, he knew how to compose and draw up a legal document,
So that no one could find a flaw in his writing;
And he knew every statute completely by heart.
He rode but simply in a parti-colored coat,
Girded with a belt of silk, with small stripes;
I tell no longer tale of his clothing.
A FRANKLIN was in his company.
His beard was white as a daisy;
As to his temperament, he was dominated by the humor blood.
He well loved a bit of bread dipped in wine in the morning;
His custom was always to live in delight,
For he was Epicurus' own son,
Who held the opinion that pure pleasure 
Was truly perfect happiness.
He was a householder, and a great one at that;
He was Saint Julian (patron of hospitality) in his country.
His bread, his ale, was always of the same (good) quality;
Nowhere was there any man better stocked with wine.
His house was never without baked pies
Of fish and meat, and that so plentiful
That in his house it snowed with food and drink;
Of all the dainties that men could imagine,
In accord with the various seasons of the year,
So he varied his midday meal and his supper.
He had very many fat partridges in pens,
And many a bream and many a pike in his fish pond.
Woe was his cook unless his sauce was
Hotly spiced and sharp, and ready all his cooking equipment.
In his hall his dining table always
Stood covered (with table cloth) and ready all the long day.
He presided as lord and sire at court sessions;
He was a member of parliament many times.
A dagger and a purse all of silk
Hung at his belt, white as morning milk.
He had been a sheriff, and an auditor of taxes.
There was nowhere such a worthy landowner.
A HABERDASHER and a CARPENTER,
A WEAVER, a DYER, and a TAPESTRY-MAKER --
And they were all clothed in one livery
Of a solemn and a great parish guild.
Their equipment was adorned all freshly and new;
Their knives were not mounted with brass
But entirely with silver, wrought very neatly and well,
Their belts and their purses every bit.
Each of them well seemed a solid citizen
To sit on a dais in a city hall.
Every one of them, for the wisdom that he knows,
Was suitable to be an alderman.
For they had enough possessions and income,
And also their wives would well assent to it;
And otherwise certainly they would be to blame.
It is very fine to be called "my lady,"
And go to feasts on holiday eves heading the procession,
And have a gown with a train royally carried.
A COOK they had with them for the occasion
To boil the chickens with the marrow bones,
And tart poudre-marchant and galingale (spices).
He well knew how to judge a draft of London ale.
He knew how to roast, and boil, and broil, and fry,
Make stews, and well bake a pie.
But it was a great harm, as it seemed to me,
That he had an open sore on his shin.
As for white pudding, he made that of the best quality.
A SHIPMAN was there, dwelling far in the west;
For all I know, he was from Dartmouth.
He rode upon a cart horse, insofar as he knew how,
In a gown of woolen cloth (that reached) to the knee.
He had a dagger hanging on a cord 
About his neck, down under his arm.
The hot summer had made his hue all brown;
And certainly he was a boon companion.
He had drawn very many a draft of wine
While coming from Bordeaux, while the merchant slept.
He had no concern for a scrupulous conscience.
If he fought and had the upper hand,
He sent them home by water to every land (they walked the plank). 
But of his skill to reckon well his tides,
His currents, and his perils near at hand,
His harbors, and positions of his moon, his navigation,
There was none other such from Hull to Cartagena (Spain).
He was bold and prudent in his undertakings;
His beard had been shaken by many a tempest.
He knew all the harbors, how they were,
From Gotland to the Cape of Finisterre,
And every inlet in Brittany and in Spain.
His ship was called the Maudelayne.
With us there was a DOCTOR OF MEDICINE
In all this world there was no one like him,
To speak of medicine and of surgery,
For he was instructed in astronomy.
He took care of his patient very many times
In (astronomically suitable) hours by (use of) his natural science.
He well knew how to calculate the planetary position
Of his astronomical talismans for his patient.
He knew the cause of every malady,
Were it of hot, or cold, or moist, or dry elements,
And where they were engendered, and by what bodily fluid.
He was a truly, perfect practitioner:
The cause known, and the source of his (patient's) harm,
Straightway he gave the sick man his remedy.
He had his apothecaries all ready 
To send him drugs and his electuaries,
For each of them made the other to profit --
Their friendship was not recently begun.
He well knew the old Aesculapius,
And Dioscorides, and also Rufus,
Old Hippocrates, Haly, and Galen,
Serapion, Rhazes, and Avicenna,
Averroes, John the Damascan, and Constantine,
Bernard, and Gaddesden, and Gilbertus.
He was moderate in his diet,
For it was of no excess,
But greatly nourishing and digestible.
His study was but little on the Bible.
He was clad all in red and in blue,
Lined with taffeta and with silk.
And yet he was moderate in spending;
He kept what he earned in (times of) plague.
Since in medicine gold is a restorative for the heart,
Therefore he loved gold in particular.
There was a good WIFE OF beside BATH,
But she was somewhat deaf, and that was a pity.
She had such a skill in cloth-making 
She surpassed them of Ypres and of Ghent.
In all the parish there was no wife 
Who should go to the Offering before her;
And if there did, certainly she was so angry
That she was out of all charity (love for her neighbor).
Her kerchiefs were very fine in texture;
I dare swear they weighed ten pound
That on a Sunday were upon her head.
Her stockings were of fine scarlet red,
Very closely laced, and shoes very supple and new.
Bold was her face, and fair, and red of hue.
She was a worthy woman all her life:
She had (married) five husbands at the church door,
Not counting other company in youth --
But there is no need to speak of that right now.
And she had been three times at Jerusalem;
She had passed many a foreign sea;
She had been at Rome, and at Boulogne,
In Galicia at Saint-James (of Compostella), and at Cologne.
She knew much about wandering by the way.
She had teeth widely set apart, truly to say.
She sat easily upon a pacing horse,
Wearing a large wimple, and on her head a hat
As broad as a buckler or a shield;
An overskirt about her large hips,
And on her feet a pair of sharp spurs.
In fellowship she well knew how to laugh and chatter.
She knew, as it happened, about remedies for love 
For she knew the old dance (tricks of the trade) of that art.
A good man was there of religion,
And (he) was a poor PARSON OF A TOWN,
But he was rich in holy thought and work.
He was also a learned man, a scholar,
Who would preach Christ's gospel truly;
He would devoutly teach his parishioners.
He was gracious, and wonderfully diligent,
And very patient in adversity,
And such he was proven many times.
He was very reluctant to excommunicate for (nonpayment of) his tithes,
But rather would he give, there is no doubt,
Unto his poor parishioners about
Some of his offering (received at mass) and also some of his income.
He knew how to have sufficiency in few possessions.
His parish was wide, and houses far apart,
But he did not omit, for rain nor thunder,
In sickness or in trouble to visit
Those living farthest away in his parish, high-ranking and low,
Going by foot, and in his hand a staff.
He gave this noble example to his sheep,
That first he wrought, and afterward he taught.
He took those words out of the gospel,
And this metaphor he added also to that,
That if gold rust, what must iron do?
For if a priest, on whom we trust, should be foul
It is no wonder for a layman to go bad;
And it is a shame, if a priest is concerned:
A shit-stained shepherd and a clean sheep.
Well ought a priest to give an example,
By his purity, how his sheep should live.
He did not rent out his benefice (ecclesiastical living)
And leave his sheep encumbered in the mire
And run to London unto Saint Paul's
To seek an appointment as a chantry priest (praying for a patron)
Or to be hired (as a chaplain) by a guild;
But dwelt at home, and kept well his sheep fold (parish),
So that the wolf did not make it go wrong;
He was a shepherd and not a hireling.
And though he was holy and virtuous,
He was not scornful to sinful men,
Nor domineering nor haughty in his speech,
But in his teaching courteous and kind.
To draw folk to heaven by gentleness,
By good example, this was his business.
Unless it were an obstinate person,
Whoever he was, of high or low rank,
He would rebuke him sharply at that time. 
I believe that nowhere is there a better priest.
He expected no pomp and ceremony,
Nor made himself an overly fastidious conscience,
But Christ's teaching and His twelve apostles 
He taught; but first he followed it himself.
With him there was a PLOWMAN, who was his brother,
Who had hauled very many a cartload of dung;
He was a true and good worker,
Living in peace and perfect love.
He loved God best with all his whole heart
At all times, whether it pleased or pained him,
And then (he loved) his neighbor exactly as himself.
He would thresh, and moreover make ditches and dig,
For Christ's sake, for every poor person,
Without payment, if it lay in his power.
He paid his tithes completely and well,
Both of  his own labor and of his possessions.
He rode in a tabard (sleeveless jacket) upon a mare.
There was also a REEVE, and a MILLER,
A SUMMONER, and a PARDONER also,
A MANCIPLE, and myself -- there were no more.
The MILLER was a stout fellow indeed;
He was very strong of muscle, and also of bones.
That was well proven, for wherever he came,
At wrestling he would always take the the prize.
He was stoutly built, broad, a large-framed fellow;
There was no door that he would not heave off its hinges,
Or break it by running at it with his head.
His beard was red as any sow or fox,
And moreover broad, as though it were a spade.
Upon the exact top of his nose he had
A wart, and thereon stood a tuft of hairs,
Red as the bristles of a sow's ears;
His nostrils were black and wide.
He wore a sword and a buckler by his side.
His mouth was as large as a large furnace.
He was a loudmouth and a buffoon,
And that was mostly of sin and deeds of harlotry.
He well knew how to steal corn and take payment three times;
And yet he had a thumb of gold, indeed.
He wore a white coat and a blue hood.
He well knew how to blow and play a bag-pipe,
And with that he brought us out of town.
There was a fine MANCIPLE of a temple (law school),
Of whom buyers of provisions might take example
For how to be wise in buying of victuals;
For whether he paid (cash) or took (goods) on credit,
Always he watched so (carefully for his opportunity) in his purchases
That he was always ahead and in good state.
Now is not that a very fair grace of God 
That such an unlearned man's wit shall surpass
The wisdom of a heap of learned men?
He had more than three times ten masters,
Who were expert and skillful in law,
Of whom there were a dozen in that house
Worthy to be stewards of rent and land
Of any lord that is in England,
To make him live by his own wealth
In honor and debtless (unless he were crazy),
Or live as economically as it pleased him to desire;
And (they would be) able to help all a shire
In any emergency that might occur or happen.
And yet this Manciple fooled them all.
The REEVE was a slender choleric man.
His beard was shaved as close as ever he can;
His hair was closely cropped by his ears;
The top of his head in front was cut short like a priest's.
His legs were very long and very lean,
Like a stick; there was no calf to be seen.
He well knew how to keep a granary and a storage bin;
There was no auditor who could earn anything (by catching him).
He well knew by the drought and by the rain
(What would be) the yield of his seed and of his grain.
His lord's sheep, his cattle, his herd of dairy cows,
His swine, his horses, his livestock, and his poultry
Was wholly in this Reeve's control,
And in accord with his contract he gave the reckoning,
Since his lord was twenty years of age.
There was no man who could find him in arrears.
There was no farm manager, nor herdsman, nor other servant,
Whose trickery and treachery he did not know;
They were afraid of him as of the plague.
His dwelling was very nicely situated upon an heath;
His place was shaded by green trees.
He could buy property better than his lord could.
He was secretly very richly provided.
He well knew how to please his lord subtly,
By giving and lending him some of his lord's own possessions,
And have thanks, and also a coat and hood (as a reward).
In youth he had learned a good craft:
He was a very good craftsman, a carpenter.
This Reeve sat upon a very good horse
That was all dapple gray and was called Scot.
He had on a long outer coat of dark blue,
And by his side he wore a rusty sword.
Of Northfolk was this Reeve of whom I tell,
Near to a town men call Bawdeswelle.
He had his coat hitched up and belted, like a friar,
And ever he rode as the last of our company.
There was a SUMMONER with us in that place,
Who had a fire-red cherubim's face,
For it was pimpled and discolored, with swollen eyelids.
He was as hot and lecherous as a sparrow,
With black, scabby brows and a beard with hair fallen out.
Children were afraid of his face.
There was no mercury, lead monoxide, nor sulphur,
Borax, white lead, nor any oil of tarter,
Nor ointment that would cleanse and burn,
That could cure him of his white pustules,
Nor of the knobs sitting on his cheeks.
He well loved garlic, onions, and also leeks,
And to drink strong wine, red as blood;
Then he would speak and cry out as if he were crazy.
And when he had drunk deeply of the wine,
Then he would speak no word but Latin.
He had a few legal terms, two or three,
That he had learned out of some text of ecclesiastical law --
That is no wonder, he heard it all the day;
And also you know well how a jay
Can call out "Walter" as well as the pope can.
But whoever knew how to examine him in other matters,
(Would find that) he had used up all his learning;
Always "The question is, what point of the law applies?" he would cry.
He was a fine rascal and a kind one;
One could not find a better fellow.
For a quart of wine he would allow
A good fellow to have his concubine
For twelve months, and excuse him completely;
Secretly he also knew how to pull off a clever trick.
And if he found anywhere a good fellow,
He would teach him to have no awe
Of the archdeacon's curse (of excommunication) in such a case,
Unless a man's soul were in his purse;
For in his purse he would be punished.
"Purse is the archdeacon's hell," he said.
But well I know he lied right certainly;
Each guilty man ought to be afraid of excommunication,
For excommunication will slay just as forgiveness saves,
And let him also beware of a Significavit (order for imprisonment).
In his control he had as he pleased
The young people of the diocese,
And knew their secrets, and was the adviser of them all.
He had set a garland upon his heed,
As large as if it were for the sign of a tavern
He had made himself a shield of a cake.
With him there rode a fine PARDONER
Of Rouncivale, his friend and his companion,
Who had come straight from the court of Rome.
Very loud he sang "Come hither, love, to me!"
This Summoner harmonized with him in a strong bass;
There was never a trumpet of half so great a sound.
This Pardoner had hair as yellow as wax,
But smooth it hung as does a clump of flax;
By small strands hung such locks as he had,
And he spread them over his shoulders;
But thin it lay, by strands one by one.
But to make an attractive appearance, he wore no hood,
For it was trussed up in his knapsack.
It seemed to him that he rode in the very latest style;
With hair unbound, save for his cap, he rode all bare-headed.
He had glaring eyes such as has a hare.
He had sewn a Veronica upon his cap.
Before him in his lap, (he had) his knapsack, 
Brimful of pardons come all fresh from Rome.
He had a voice as small as a goat has.
He had no beard, nor never would have;
It (his face) was as smooth as if it were recently shaven.
I believe he was a eunuch or a homosexual.
But as to his craft, from Berwick to Ware
There was no other pardoner like him.
For in his pouch he had a pillow-case,
Which he said was Our Lady's veil;
He said he had a piece of the sail
That Saint Peter had, when he went
Upon the sea, until Jesus Christ took him.
He had a cross of latten (brass-like alloy) covered with stones,
And in a glass container he had pigs' bones.
But with these relics, when he found
A poor parson dwelling in the countryside,
In one day he got himself more money
Than the parson got in two months;
And thus, with feigned flattery and tricks,
He made fools of the parson and the people.
But truly to tell at the last,
He was in church a noble ecclesiast.
He well knew how to read a lesson or a story,
But best of all he sang an Offertory;
For he knew well, when that song was sung,
He must preach and well smooth his speech
To win silver, as he very well knew how; 
Therefore he sang the more merrily and loud.
Now have I told you truly, briefly,
The rank, the dress, the number, and also the cause
Why this company was assembled 
In Southwark at this fine hostelry
That is called the Tabard, close by the Bell.
But now it is time to tell to you 
How we conducted ourselves that same night,
When we had arrived in that hostelry;
And after that I will tell of our journey
And all the rest of our pilgrimage.
But first I pray yow, of your courtesy,
That you do not attribute it to my rudeness,
Though I speak plainly in this matter,
To tell you their words and their behavior,
Nor though I speak their words accurately.
For this you know as well as I:
Whoever must repeat a story after someone,
He must repeat as closely as ever he knows how
Every single word, if it be in his power,
Although he may speak ever so rudely and freely,
Or else he must tell his tale inaccurately,
Or make up things, or find new words.
He may not refrain from (telling the truth), although he were his brother;
He must as well say one word as another.
Christ himself spoke very plainly in holy writ,
And you know well it is no rudeness.
Also Plato says, whosoever knows how to read him,
The words must be closely related to the deed.
Also I pray you to forgive it to me,
Although I have not set folk in order of their rank
Here in this tale, as they should stand.
My wit is short, you can well understand.
Our Host made great hospitality to everyone of us,
And to the supper he set us straightway.
He served us with victuals of the best sort;
The wine was strong, and it well pleased us to drink.
OUR HOST was an impressive man indeed
(Qualified) to be a master of ceremonies in a hall.
He was a large man with prominent eyes --
There was no better business man in Cheapside --
Bold of his speech, and wise, and well mannered,
And he lacked nothing at all of the qualities proper to a man.
Also moreover he was a right merry man;
And after supper he began to be merry,
And spoke of mirth among other things,
When we had paid our bills,
And said thus: "Now, gentlemen, truly,
You are right heartily welcome to me;
For by my word, if I shall not lie (I must say),
I saw not this year so merry a company
At one time in this lodging as is (here) now.
I would gladly make you happy, if I knew how.
And I have just now thought of an amusement,
To give you pleasure, and it shall cost nothing.
"You go to Canterbury -- God give you success,
May the blessed martyr give you your reward!
And well I know, as you go by the way,
You intend to tell tales and to amuse yourselves;
For truly, it is no comfort nor mirth
To ride by the way dumb as a stone;
And therefore I will make a game for you,
As I said before, and provide you some pleasure.
And if pleases you all unanimously
To be subject to my judgment,
And to do as I shall tell you,
Tomorrow, when you ride by the way,
Now, by the soul of my father who is dead,
Unless you be merry, I will give you my head!
Hold up your hands, without more speech."
Our decision was not long to seek out.
It seemed to us it was not worthwhile to deliberate on it,
And (we) granted his request without more discussion,
And asked him to say his decision as it pleased him.
"Gentlemen," said he, "now listen for the best course of action;
But, I pray yow, do not take it in disdain (scorn it).
This is the point, to speak briefly and clearly,
That each of yow, to make our way seem short by this means,
Must tell two tales in this journey
On the way to Canterbury, that is what I mean,
And on the homeward trip he shall tell two others,
About adventures that in old times have happened.
And whoever of you who does best of all --
That is to say, who tells in this case
Tales of best moral meaning and most pleasure --
Shall have a supper at the cost of us all
Here in this place, sitting by this post,
When we come back from Canterbury.
And to make you the more merry,
I will myself gladly ride with you,
Entirely at my own cost, and be your guide;
And whosoever will not accept my judgment 
Shall pay all that we spend by the way.
And if you grant that it be so,
Tell me straightway, without more words,
And I will get ready early for this."
This thing was granted, and our oaths sworn
With very glad hearts, and (we) prayed him also
That he would consent to do so,
And that he would be our governor,
And judge and score keeper of our tales,
And set a supper at a certain price,
And we will be ruled as he wishes
In every respect; and thus unanimously
We are accorded to his judgment.
And thereupon the wine was fetched immediately;
We drank, and each one went to rest,
Without any longer tarrying.
In the morning, when day began to spring,
Our Host arose, and was the rooster of us all (awakened us).
And gathered us together all in a flock,
And forth we rode at little more than a walk
Unto the Watering of Saint Thomas;
And there our Host stopped his horse
And said, "Gentlemen, listen, if you please.
You know your agreement, and I remind you of it.
If what you said last night agrees with what you say this morning, 
Let's see now who shall tell the first tale.
As ever I may drink wine or ale,
Whosoever may be rebel to my judgment
Shall pay for all that is spent by the way.
Now draw straws, before we depart further (from London);
He who has the shortest shall begin.
Sir Knight," said he, "my master and my lord,
Now draw a straw, for that is my decision.
Come nearer," he said, "my lady Prioress.
And you, sir Clerk, let be your modesty,
And study not; lay hand to (draw a straw), every man!"
Every person began straightway to draw,
And shortly to tell as it was,
Were it by chance, or destiny, or luck,
The truth is this: the draw fell to the Knight,
For which everyone was very happy and glad,
And he must tell his tale, as was reasonable,
By our previous promise and by formal agreement,
As you have heard; what more words are needed?
And when this good man saw that it was so,
Like one who was wise and obedient
To keep his agreement by his free assent,
He said, "Since I must begin the game,
What! Welcome be the draw, in God's name!
Now let us ride, and listen to what I say."
And with that word we rode forth on our way,
And he began with a truly merry demeanor
To tell his tale straightway, and said as you may hear.
When the Knight had thus told his tale,
In all the company there was no one young nor old
Who did not say it was a noble story
And worthy to draw into memory,
And especially the gentlefolk every one.
Our Host laughed and swore, "As I may move about (I swear),
This goes well; the bag is opened.
Let's see now who shall tell another tale;
For truly the game is well begun.
Now tell you, sir Monk, if you can,
Something to equal the Knight's tale."
The Miller, who for drunkenness was all pale,
So that he hardly sat upon his horse,
He would not doff neither hood nor hat,
Nor give preference to any man out of courtesy,
But in Pilate's voice he began to cry,
And swore, "By (Christ's) arms, and by blood and bones,
I know a noble tale for this occasion,
With which I will now requite the Knight's tale."
Our Host saw that he was drunk on ale,
And said, "Wait, Robin, my dear brother;
Some better man shall first tell us another.
Wait, and let us act properly."
"By God's soul," said he, "that will not I;
For I will speak or else go my way."
Our Host answered, "Tell on, in the devil's name!
Thou art a fool; thy wit is overcome."
"Now listen," said the Miller, "everyone!
But first I make a protestation
That I am drunk; I know it by my sound.
And therefore if that I misspeak or say (amiss),
Blame it on ale of Southwerk, I you pray.
For I will tell a legend and a life
Both of a carpenter and of his wife,
How a clerk has set the carpenter's cap (fooled him)."
The Reeve answered and said, "Hold your tongue!
Let be thy ignorant drunken ribaldry.
It is a sin and also a great folly
To slander any man, or defame him,
And also to bring wives in such ill fame.
Thou canst say enough about other things."
This drunken Miller spoke very quickly in reply
And said, "Dear brother Oswald,
He who has no wife, he is no cuckold.
But I say not therefore that thou art one;
There are very good wives, many a one,
And ever a thousand good against one bad.
Thou knowest that well thyself, unless thou art mad.
Why art thou angry with my tale now?
I have a wife, by God, as well as thou;
Yet I would not, for the oxen in my plow,
Take upon me more than enough (trouble),
As to believe of myself that I were one (a cuckold);
I will believe well that I am not one.
A husband must not be inquisitive
Of God's secrets, nor of his wife.
So long as he can find God's plenty there,
Of the rest he needs not enquire."
What more should I say, but this Miller
He would not refrain from speaking for any man,
But told his churl's tale in his manner.
I regret that I must repeat it here.
And therefore every respectable person I pray,
For God's love, think not that I speak
Out of evil intention, but because I must repeat
All their tales, be they better or worse,
Or else (I must) falsify some of my material.
And therefore, whoever does not want to hear it,
Turn over the leaf and choose another tale;
For he shall find enough, of every sort,
Of historical matter that concerns nobility,
And also morality and holiness.
Blame not me if you choose amiss.
The Miller is a churl; you know this well.
So was the Reeve also and many others,
And ribaldry they told, both of the two.
Think about this, and don't blame me;
And also people should not take a joke too seriously.
There was once dwelling at Oxford
A rich churl, who took in boarders,
And of his craft he was a carpenter.
With him there was dwelling a poor scholar,
Who had learned the arts curriculum, but all his desire
Was turned to learning astrology,
And he knew a certain (number of) of astronomical operations,
To determine by scientific calculations,
If men asked him, in specific (astronomical) hours
When men should have drought or else showers,
Or if people asked him what should happen
Concerning every thing; I can not reckon them all.
This clerk was called clever Nicholas.
Of secret love he knew and of its satisfaction;
And moreover he was sly and very discreet,
And like a maiden meek in appearance.
A room had he in that hostelry
Alone, without any company,
Very elegantly strewn with sweet-smelling herbs;
And he himself as sweet as is the root
Of licorice or any zedoary (a ginger-like herb).
His Almagest, and books large and small,
His astrolabe, belonging to his art (of astronomy),
His counting stones (for his abacus) lie neatly apart,
Arranged on shelves at his bed's head;
His linen press covered with a red woolen cloth;
And all above there lay a fine psaltery,
On which at night he made melody
So sweetly that all the room rang;
And "The Angel to the Virgin" he sang;
And after that he sang the King's Tune.
Very often his merry throat was blessed.
And thus this sweet clerk spent his time 
Living on his friends' support and his (own) income.
This carpenter had recently wedded a wife,
Whom he loved more than his life;
She was eighteen years of age.
Jealous he was, and held her narrowly in confinement,
For she was wild and young, and he was old
And believed himself likely to be a cuckold.
He knew not Cato, for his wit was rude,
Who advised that man should wed his equal.
Men should wed according to their status in life,
For youth and old age are often in conflict.
But since he was fallen in the snare,
He must endure, like other folk, his troubles.
Fair was this young wife, and moreover
As any weasel was her body graceful and slender.
A belt she wore, with decorative strips all of silk,
An apron as white as morning milk
Upon her loins, full of many a flounce.
White was her smock, and embroidered all in front
And also behind, around her collar,
With coal-black silk, within and also without.
The ribbons of her white cap
Were of the same color as her collar;
Her headband broad of silk, and set very high.
And surely she had a wanton eye;
Her two eyebrows were plucked very thin,
And those were bent and black as any sloe.
She was much more blissful to look upon
Than is the new early-ripe pear tree,
And softer than the wool is of a sheep.
And by her girdle hung a purse of leather,
Tasseled with silk and ornamented with latten "pearls."
In all this world, to seek up and down,
There is no man so wise that he could imagine
So lovely a little doll or such a wench.
Much brighter was the shining of her complexion
Than the newly minted noble in the Tower.
But of her song, it was as loud and lively
As any swallow sitting on a barn.
Moreover she could skip and play,
Like any kid or calf following its mother.
Her mouth was sweet as ale and honey or mead,
Or a hoard of apples laid in hay or heather.
Skittish she was, as is a spirited colt,
Tall as a mast, and straight as an arrow.
A brooch she wore upon her low collar,
As broad as is the boss of a shield.
Her shoes were laced high on her legs.
She was a primrose, a pig's eye (a flower),
For any lord to lay in his bed,
Or yet for any good yeoman to wed.   
Now, sir, and again, sir, it so happened
That one day this clever Nicholas
Happened with this young wife to flirt and play,
While her husband was at Oseneye,
For clerks are very subtle and very clever;
And intimately he caught her by her crotch,
And said, "Indeed, unless I have my will,
For secret love of thee, sweetheart, I die."
And held her hard by the thigh,
And said, "Sweetheart, love me immediately
Or I will die, so save me God!"
And she sprang as a colt does when restrained,
And with her head she twisted fast away,
And said, "I will not kiss thee, by my faith!
Why, let me be!" said she. "Let me be, Nicholas,
Or I will cry `out, help' and `alas'!
Take away your hands, for your courtesy!"
This Nicholas began to cry for mercy,
And spoke so fair, and pressed his suit so fast,
That she granted him her love at the last,
And swore her oath, by Saint Thomas of Kent,
That she will be at his commandment,
When she may well espy her opportunity.
"My husband is so full of jealousy
That unless you wait patiently and are secretive,
I know right well I am as good as dead," said she.
"You must been very secret in this matter."
"No, care thee not about that," said Nicholas.
"A clerk had badly wasted his time (studying),
If he could not outwit a carpenter."
And thus they are agreed and sworn
To wait for a time, as I have told before.
When Nicholas had done thus every bit
And well patted her about the loins,
He kissed her sweetly and takes his psaltery,
And plays fast, and makes melody.
Then it thus happened, that to the parish church,
Christ's own works to do,
This good wife went on a holiday.
Her forehead shone as bright as any day,
It was so washed when she left her work.
Now was there of that church a parish clerk,
Who was called Absolon.
Curly was his hair, and as the gold it shone,
And stretched out like a fan large and broad;
Very straight and even lay his elegant parted hair.
His complexion was ruddy, his eyes gray as a goose.
With St. Paul's window carved on his shoes,
In red hose he went elegantly.
Clad he was very trimly and properly
All in a tunic of a light blue;
Very fair and thick are the laces set.
And over that he had a gay surplice
As white as is the blossom upon the branch.
A merry lad he was, so save me God.
Well could he draw blood, and cut hair and shave,
And make a charter of land or a legal release. 
In twenty different ways could he trip and dance
After the school of Oxford as it was then,
And with his legs kick to and fro,
And play songs on a small fiddle,
To which he some times sang a loud high treble;
And he could play as well on a guitar.
In all the town there was no brew house nor tavern
That he did not visit with his entertainment,
Where any merry barmaid was.
But to say the truth, he was somewhat squeamish
About farting, and fastidious in his speech.
This Absolon, who was elegant and gay,
Goes with a censer on the holiday,
Censing the wives of the parish eagerly;
And many a lovely look he cast on them,
And especially on this carpenter's wife.
To look on her he thought a merry life,
She was so attractive and sweet and flirtatious.
I dare well say, if she had been a mouse,
And he a cat, he would have grabbed her at once.
This parish clerk, this elegant Absolon,
Has in his heart such a love-longing
That of no wife took he any offering;
For courtesy, he said, he would have none.
The moon, when it was night, very brightly shone,
And Absolon his guitar has taken;
For the sake of love he intended to stay awake.
And forth he goes, elegant and amorous,
Until he came to the carpenter's house
A little after cocks had crowed,
And took his place up by a casement window
That was upon the carpenter's wall.
He sings in his voice gentle and high,
"Now, dear lady, if it be thy will,
I pray yow that you will have pity on me,"
Very well in harmony with his guitar-playing.
This carpenter awoke, and heard him sing,
And spoke unto his wife, and said at once,
"What! Alison! Hearest thou not Absolon,
That chants thus next to our bedroom's wall?"
And she answered her husband immediately,
"Yes indeed, God knows, John, I hear it every bit."
This goes on; what more would you have?
From day to day this elegant Absolon
So woos her that he is in a sorry state.
He stays awake all the night and all the day;
He combs his flowing locks, and dressed himself elegantly;
He woos her by go-betweens and agents,
And swore he would be her own servant;
He sings, trilling like a nightingale;
He sent her sweetened wine, mead, and spiced ale,
And wafers, piping hot out of the fire;
And, because she was a townie, he offered money;
For some folk will be won for riches,
And some by force, and some for noble character.
Sometimes, to show his agility and skill,
He plays Herod upon a high stage.
But what good does it do him in this case?
She so loves this clever Nicholas
That Absolon may go whistle;
He had for his labor nothing but scorn.
And thus she makes Absolon her fool,
And turns all his earnestness into a joke.
Very true is this proverb, it is no lie,
Men say right thus: "Always the nearby sly one
Makes the distant loved one to be disliked."
For though Absolon be crazed or angry,
Because he was far from her sight,
This nearby Nicholas cast him in the shadow.
Now bear thyself well, thou clever Nicholas,
For Absolon may wail and sing "alas."
And so it happened on a Saturday,
This carpenter was gone to Osenay;
And clever Nicholas and Alisoun
Are agreed on this plan,
That Nicholas shall devise a trick
To beguile this hapless jealous husband;
And if it so be the game went right,
She should sleep in his arms all night,
For this was his desire and hers also.
And right away, without more words,
This Nicholas no longer would tarry,
But has carried very quietly unto his chamber
Both food and drink for a day or two,
And told her to say to her husband,
If he asked about Nicholas,
She should say she knew not where he was;
Of all that day she saw him not with eye;
She believed that he was ill,
Because, for no shout could her maid call him,
He would not answer for anything that might befall.
This goes on all that same Saturday,
That Nicholas still in his chamber lay,
And ate and slept, or did what he pleased,
Until Sunday, when the sun goes to rest.
This hapless carpenter has great marvel
About Nicholas, or what thing might ail him,
And said, "I am afraid, by Saint Thomas,
Things are not right with Nicholas.
God forbid that he should suddenly die!
This world is now very ticklish, surely.
I saw today a corpse carried to church
That just now, on last Monday, I saw him work.
"Go up," he said unto his servant at once,
"Call at his door, or knock with a stone.
Look how it is, and tell me quickly."
This servant goes up very resolutely,
And at the chamber door while he stood,
He cried and knocked as if he were crazy,
"What, hey! What do you, master Nicholay?
How can you sleep all the long day?"
But all for naught; he heard not a word.
He found a hole, very low upon a board,
Where the cat was accustomed to creep in,
And through that hole he looked in very carefully,
And at the last he had a sight of him.
This Nicholas sat ever gaping upward,
As if he were gazing on the new moon.
Down he goes, and told his master immediately
In what condition he saw this same man.
This carpenter began to bless himself,
And said, "Help us, Saint Frideswide!
A man knows little what shall happen to him.
This man is fallen, because of his astronomy,
In some madness or in some fit.
I always thought well how it should be!
Men should not know of God's secrets.
Yes, blessed be always an unlearned man
Who knows nothing but only his belief!
So fared another clerk with astronomy;
He walked in the fields to look 
Upon the stars, (to find) there what should happen,
Until he was fallen in a fertilizer pit;
He did not see that. But yet, by Saint Thomas,
I feel very sorry for clever Nicholas.
He shall be scolded for his studying,
If that I may, by Jesus, heaven's king!
Get me a staff, that I may pry up from below,   
While thou, Robyn, lift up the door.
He shall (come) out of his studying, as I guess."
And to the chamber door he turned his attention.
His servant was a strong fellow for this purpose,
And by the hasp he heaved it off at once;
Onto the floor the door fell straightway.
This Nicholas sat ever as still as stone,
And ever gaped upward into the air.
This carpenter supposed he was in despair,
And seized him by the shoulders vigorously,
And shook him hard, and cried loudly,
"What! Nicholay! What, how! What, look down!
Awake, and think on Christ's passion!
I bless thee from elves and from evil creatures."
Therewith the night-charm he said straightway
On four corners of the house about,
And on the threshold of the door outside:
"Jesus Christ and Saint Benedict,
Bless this house from every wicked creature,
For evil spirits of the nights, the white pater-noster!
Where went thou, Saint Peter's sister?"
And at the last this clever Nicholas
Began to sigh deeply, and said, "Alas!
Shall all the world be lost right now?"
This carpenter answered, "What sayest thou?
What! Think on God, as we do, men who work."
This Nicholas answered, "Fetch me drink,
And after will I speak in private
About a certain matter that concerns me and thee.
I will tell it to no other man, certainly."
This carpenter goes down, and comes again,
And brought of strong ale a large quart;
And when each of them had drunk his part,
This Nicholas shut fast his door,
And the carpenter sat down by him.
He said, "John, my host, beloved and dear,
Thou shalt upon thy pledged word swear to me here
That to no person thou shalt this counsel reveal,
For it is Christ's secrets that I say,
And if thou tell it to anyone, thou art completely lost;
For this vengeance thou shalt have therefore,
That if thou betray me, thou shalt go mad."
"Nay, Christ forbid it, for his holy blood!"
Said then this hapless man, "I am no blabbermouth,
And, though I say it, I do not like to gab.
Say what thou will, I shall never tell it 
To child nor wife, by Him that rescued souls from hell!"
"Now John," said Nicholas, "I will not lie;
I have found in my astrology,
As I have looked on the bright moon,
That now on Monday next, after midnight,
Shall fall a rain, and that so wild and raging
That Noah's flood was never half so large.
This world," he said, "in less than an hour
Shall all be drowned, so hideous is the shower.
Thus shall mankind drown, and lose their lives."
This carpenter answered, "Alas, my wife!
And shall she drown? Alas, my Alisoun!"
For sorrow of this he almost fell down,
And said, "Is there no remedy in this case?"
"Why, yes indeed, by God," said clever Nicholas,
"If thou will act in accordance with learning and (good) advice.
Thou mayst not act according to thine own ideas;
For thus says Salomon, which was very true:
`Do all in accordance with good advice, and thou shalt not rue (it).'
And if thou will act in accordance with good advice,
I guarantee, without mast and sail,
Yet shall I save her and thee and me.
Hast thou not heard how Noah was saved,
When our Lord had warned him before
That all the world should be destroyed by water?"
"Yes indeed," said this Carpenter, "very long ago."
"Hast thou not heard," said Nicholas, "also
The sorrow of Noah with his fellowship,
Before he could get his wife onto the ship?
He would rather, I dare well guarantee,
At that time, than have all his black sheep
That she had had a ship for herself alone.
And therefore, knowest thou what is best to do?
This needs haste, and of a hasty thing
Men may not preach nor make tarrying.
"Right now go bring us quickly into this dwelling
A kneading trough, or else a large vat,
For each of us, but see that they be large,
In which we may float as in a barge,
And have therein sufficient victuals
But for a day -- fie on the remnant!
The water shall recede and go away
About nine a.m. on the next day.
But Robin, thy knave, may not know of this, 
And also thy maid Gille I can not save;
Ask not why, for though thou ask me,
I will not tell God's secrets.
It suffices thee, unless thy wits go mad,
To have as great a grace as Noah had.
Thy wife shall I well save, beyond doubt.
Go now thy way, and speed thee on this business.
"But when thou hast, for her and thee and me,
Got us these three kneading tubs,
Then shalt thou hang them in the roof very high,
In a way that no man may espy our preparations.
And when thou thus hast done as I have said,
And hast laid our victuals carefully in them,
And also an axe to smite the cord in two,
When the water comes, so that we may go
And break a hole on high, upon the gable,
Toward the garden, over the stable,
That we may freely pass forth on our way,
When the great shower is gone away.
Then shalt thou float as merry, I guarantee,
As does the white duck after her drake.
Then will I call, `How, Alison! How, John!
Be merry, for the flood will soon pass.'
And thou will say, `Hail, master Nicholay!
Good morrow, I see thee well, for it is day.'
And then shall we be lords all our life
Of all the world, like Noah and his wife.
"But of one thing I warn thee very sternly:
Be well advised on that same night
On which we are entered onto shipboard,
That not one of us speak a word,
Nor call, nor cry, but be in his prayer;
For it is God's own dear command.
"Thy wife and thou must hang far apart,
So that between yow shall be no sin,
No more in looking than there shall be in deed.
This ordinance is said. Go, God give thee success!
Tomorrow at night, when people are all asleep,
Into our kneading-tubs will we creep,
And sit there, awaiting God's grace.
Go now thy way; I have no more time
To make of this any longer preaching.
Men say thus, `send the wise, and say nothing.'
Thou art so wise, one needs not teach thee.
Go, save our life, and that I beseech thee."
This hapless carpenter goes forth his way.
Very often he said "Alas and woe is me,"
And to his wife he told his secret,
And she was aware, and knew it better than he,
What all this ingenious scheme meant.
But nonetheless she acted as if she would die,
And said, "Alas! go forth thy way quickly,
Help us to escape, or we are dead each one of us!
I am thy faithful, truly wedded wife;
Go, dear spouse, and help to save our lives."
Lo, what a great thing is emotion!
One can die of imagination,
So deeply may a mental image be taken.
This hapless carpenter begins to tremble;
He thinks truly that he can see
Noah's flood come surging like the sea
To drown Alisoun, his honey dear.
He weeps, wails, looks wretched;
He sighs with very many a sorry groan;
He goes and gets him a kneading trough,
And after that a tub and a large vat,
And secretly he sent them to his dwelling,
And hanged them in the roof secretly.
With his own hand he made three ladders,
To climb by the rungs and the uprights
Unto the tubs hanging in the beams,
And provisioned them, both trough and tub,
With bread, and cheese, and good ale in a jug,
Sufficing just enough for a day.
But before he had made all this preparation,
He sent his servant, and also his servant girl,
Upon his business to go to London.
And on the Monday, when it drew toward night,
He shut his door without candlelight,
And prepared everything as it should be.
And shortly, up they climbed all three;
They sat still a good two and one-half minutes.
"Now, Pater-noster, quiet!" said Nicholay,
And "Quiet!" said John, and "Quiet!" said Alisoun.
This carpenter said his devotion,
And still he sits, and says his prayer,
Awaiting the rain, if he might hear it.
The dead sleep, for weary business,
Fell on this carpenter right, as I guess,
About curfew time, or a little more;
For suffering of his spirit he groans deeply,
And also he snores, for his head lay wrong.
Down on the ladder stalks Nicholay,
And Alisoun very quietly down she sped;
Without more words they go to bed,
Where the carpenter is accustomed to lie.
There was the revel and the sounds of festivity;
And thus lie Alison and Nicholas,
In business of mirth and of pleasure,
Until the bell of the early morning service began to ring,
And friars in the chapel began to sing.
This parish clerk, this amorous Absolon,
That is for love always so woebegone,
Upon the Monday was at Oseneye
With company, to be merry and amuse himself,
And by chance asked a cloistered monk
Very discreetly about John the carpenter;
And he drew him apart out of the church,
And said, "I know not; I have not seen him working here
Since Saturday; I suppose that he is gone
For timber, where our abbot has sent him;
For he is accustomed to go for timber 
And dwell at the granary a day or two;
Or else he is at his house, certainly.
Where he may be, I can not truly say."
This Absolon very was jolly and happy,
And thought, "Now is time to stay awake all night,
For surely I saw him not stirring
About his door, since day began to spring.
"As I may prosper, I shall, at cock's crow,
Very quietly knock at his window
That stands very low upon his bedroom's wall.
To Alison now I will tell all
My love-longing, for yet I shall not miss
That at the very least I shall her kiss.
Some sort of comfort shall I have, by my faith.
My mouth has itched all this long day;
That is a sign of kissing at the least.
All night I dreamed also I was at a feast.
Therefore I will go sleep an hour or two,
And all the night then will I stay awake and play."
When the first cock has crowed (about midnight), at once
Up rises this elegant lover Absolon,
And dresses himself handsomely, in every detail.
But first he chews cardamom and licorice,
To smell sweet, ere he had combed his hair.
Under his tongue he had a true-love herb,
For thus he thought he would be gracious.
He goes to the carpenter's house,
And he stands still under the casement window --
Unto his breast it reached, it was so low --
And softly he coughs with a gentle sound:
"What do you, honey-comb, sweet Alisoun,
My fair bird, my sweet cinnamon?
Awake, sweetheart mine, and speak to me!
Well little you think upon my woe,
That for your love I sweat wherever I go.
No wonder is though that I swelter and sweat;
I mourn as does a lamb after the tit.
Indeed, sweetheart, I have such love-longing
That like a true turtledove is my mourning.
I can eat no more than a maiden."
"Go from the window, you idiot," she said;
"So help me God, it will not be `come kiss me.'
I love another -- and else I were to blame --
Well better than thee, by Jesus, Absolon.
Go forth thy way, or I will cast a stone,
And let me sleep, in the name of twenty devils!"
"Alas," said Absolon, "and woe is me,
That true love was ever in such miserable circumstances!
Then kiss me, since it can be no better,
For Jesus' love, and for the love of me."
"Wilt thou then go thy way with that?" said she.
"Yes, certainly, sweetheart," said this Absolon.
"Then make thee ready," said she, "I come right now." 
And unto Nicholas she said quietly,
"Now hush, and thou shalt laugh all thy fill."
This Absolon set himself down on his knees
And said, "I am a lord in every way;
For after this I hope there comes more.
Sweetheart, thy grace, and sweet bird, thy mercy!"
The window she undoes, and that in haste.
"Get done with it," said she, "come on, and hurry up,
Lest our neighbors espy thee."
This Absolon wiped his mouth very dry.
Dark was the night as pitch, or as the coal,
And at the window out she put her hole,
And Absolon, to him it happened no better nor worse,
But with his mouth he kissed her naked ass
With great relish, before he was aware of this.
Back he jumped, and thought it was amiss,
For well he knew a woman has no beard.
He felt a thing all rough and long haired,
And said, "Fie! alas! what have I done?"
"Tehee!" said she, and clapped the window to,
And Absolon goes forth walking sadly.
"A beard! A beard!" said clever Nicholas,
"By God's body, this goes fair and well."
This hapless Absolon heard every bit,
And on his lip he began for anger to bite,
And to himself he said, "I shall pay thee back." 
Who rubs now, who now scrubs his lips
With dust, with sand, with straw, with cloth, with chips,
But Absolon, who says very often, "Alas!"
"My soul I entrust to Satan,
If I would not rather than (have) all this town," said he,
"Be avenged for this insult.
Alas," said he, "alas, I did not turn away!"
His hot love was cold and all extinguished;
For from that time that he had kissed her ass,
Love-making he thought not worth not a watercress,
For he was healed of his malady.
Very often he did renounce love-making,
And wept as does a child that is beaten.
At a slow pace he went down the street
To a smith men called dan Gerveys,
Who in his forge made plowing equipment; 
He sharpens ploughshares and plough blades busily.
This Absolon knocked all gently,
And said, "Open up, Gerveys, and that right now."
"What, who art thou?" "It am I, Absolon."
"What, Absolon! for Christ's sweet cross,
Why rise you so early? Ay, bless me!
What ails yow? Some pretty girl, God knows it,
Hath brought you to be running around  like this.
By Saint Note, you know well what I mean."
This Absolon cared not a bean
For all his joking; no word he gave in reply;
He had more business on hand 
Than Gerveys knew, and said, "Friend so dear,
That hot plough blade in the hearth here,
Lend it to me; I have something to do with it,
And I will bring it back to thee very soon."
Gerveys answered, "Certainly, were it gold,
Or in a sack countless silver coins,
Thou sholdest have it, as I am true smith.
Ay, Christ's foe! What will you do with it?"
"Concerning that," said Absolon, "be as be may.
I shall well tell it to thee to-morrow" --
And caught the plough blade by the cold handle.
Very softly out at the door he began to steal,
And went unto the carpenter's wall.   
He coughs first, and knocks then
Upon the window, just as he did before.
This Alison answered, "Who is there
That knocks so? I swear it is a thief."
"Why, nay," said he, "God knows, my sweet beloved,
I am thy Absolon, my darling.
Of gold," said he, "I have brought thee a ring.
My mother gave it to me, as God may save me;
Very fine it is, and also nicely engraved.
This will I give thee, if thou kiss me."
This Nicholas was risen to piss,
And thought he would make the joke even better;
He should kiss his ass before he escapes.
And he opened up the window hastily,
And he puts out his ass stealthily
Over the buttock, to the thigh;
And then spoke this clerk, this Absolon,
"Speak, sweet bird, I know not where thou art."
This Nicholas immediately let fly a fart
As great as if it had been a thunder-bolt,
So that with the stroke he was almost blinded;
And he was ready with his hot iron,
And he smote Nicholas in the middle of the ass.
Off goes the skin a hand's breadth about,
The hot plough blade so burned his rump
And for the pain he thought he would die.
As if he were crazy, for woe he began to cry,
"Help! Water! Water! Help, for God's heart!"
This carpenter woke suddenly out of his slumber,
And heard someone cry "water!" as if he were crazy,
And thought, "Alas, now comes Nowell's flood!"
He sits up without more words,
And with his ax he smote the cord in two,
And down goes all; he found nothing to sell (wasted no time),
Neither bread nor ale, until he came to the pavement
Upon the floor, and there he lay in a swoon.
Up started Alison and Nicholay,
And cried "Out" and "Help" in the street.
The neighbors, both low-ranking and high,
Run in to gawk at this man,
Who yet lay in a swoon, both pale and wan,
For with the fall he had broken his arm.
But he had to stand up for himself, though it went badly;
For when he spoke, he was immediately put down
By clever Nicholas and Alisoun.
They told every one that he was crazy;
He was so afraid of Nowell's flood
Because of his imagination that in his foolishness
He had bought himself three kneading tubs,
And had hanged them in the roof above;
And that he begged them, for God's love,
To sit in the roof, to keep him company.
The folk did laugh at his foolishness;
Into the roof they stare and they gape,
And turned all his harm into a joke.
For whatever this carpenter answered,
It was for naught; no one listened to his explanation,
With oaths great he was so sworn down
That he was considered crazy in all the town;
For every clerk immediately agreed with the other.
They said, "The man is crazy, my dear brother";
And every person did laugh at this strife.
Thus screwed was this carpenter's wife,
In spite of all his guarding and his jealousy,
And Absolon has kissed her lower eye,
And Nicholas is scalded in the rump.
This tale is done, and God save all this company!
When Arcite was come to Thebes,
Very often each day he grew faint and said "Alas!"
For he shall never more see his lady.
And shortly to conclude (telling) all his woe,
So much sorrow never had creature
That is, or shall (be), while the world may endure.
He is bereft of his sleep, his food, his drink
So that he became lean and dry as is a stick;
His eyes sunken and grisly to behold,
His hue sickly yellow and pale as cold ashes,
And he was solitary and ever alone,
And wailing all the night, making his moan;
And if he heard song or instrument,
Then would he weep, he could not be stopped.
So feeble also were his spirits, and so low,
And changed so, that no man could know
His speech nor his voice, though men heard it.
And in his behavior for all the world he fared
Not only like the lover's malady
Of Hereos, but rather like mania,
Engendered by the melancholic humor 
In the front lobe, in his imagination.
And shortly, all was turned topsy-turvy
Both the physical condition and also the mental disposition
Of him, this woeful lover dan Arcite.
Why should I all daylong write of his woe?
When he had endured a year or two
This cruel torment and this pain and woe,
At Thebes, in his country, as I said,
Upon one night as he laid himself in sleep,
It seemed to him that the winged god Mercury
Stood before him and commanded him to be merry.
His sleep-inducing staff he carried upright in his hand;
He wore a hat upon his bright hair.
This god was dressed, as he (Arcite) noticed,
As he was when he put Argus to sleep;
And said to him thus: "To Athens shalt thou go,
Where an end of thy woe is destined for thee."
And with that word Arcite awoke and leaped up.
"Now truly, however sorely it may pain me,"
Said he, "I will go to Athens right now,
Nor shall I refrain for the dread of death 
From seeing my lady, whom I love and serve.
In her presence I care not if I die."
And with that word he picked up a large mirror,
And saw that all his color was changed,
And saw his visage all (changed) to another sort.
And right away it ran to him in his mind,
That, since his face was so disfigured
By the malady which he had endured,
He might well, if he conducted himself humbly,
Live in Athens evermore unknown,
And see his lady almost every day.
And right away he changed his clothing,
And clad himself as a poor laborer,
And all alone, except only a squire
Who knew his private affairs and all his situation,
Who was disguised as poorly as he was,
To Athens he is gone the nearest way.
And to the court he went upon a day,
And at the gate he offers his service
To drudge and draw water, whatever men will command.
And shortly to speak of this matter,
He was given employment by a household attendant
Who was dwelling with Emelye,
For he was wise and could soon take the measure
Of every servant, who serves here.
He could well hew wood, and carry water,
For he was young and mighty indeed,
And moreover he was tall and strong of bones
To do what any one can command him.
A year or two he was in this service,
Page of the chamber of Emelye the bright,
And he said that he was called Philostrate.
But half so well beloved a man as he
Was never in court (anyone) of his rank;
He was so noble in manner
That his fame was (spread) throughout all the court .
They said that it would be a act of charity
If Theseus would advance his rank,
And put him in noble employment,
Where he could exercise his abilities.
And thus within a short time his fame is sprung,
Both for his deeds and his good speech,
That Theseus has taken him so near
That he has made him a squire of his chamber,
And gave him gold to maintain (a life style suitable to) his rank.
And also men brought him out of his country,
From year to year, very secretly, his income;
But properly and slyly he spent it,
So that no man wondered how he acquired it.
And three years in this manner he led his life,
And conducted himself so that, in peace and also in war,
There was no man whom Theseus holds dearer.
And in this bliss I now leave Arcite,
And I will speak of Palamon a little.
These seven years Palamon has sat 
Wasted by suffering, what for woe and for distress.
Who feels double pain and sadness
But Palamon, whom love so afflicts
That he goes mad, out of his wits because of woe?
And also moreover he is a prisoner
Perpetually, not just for a year.
Who could rime in English properly
His martyrdom? In truth it is not I;
Therefore I pass on as quickly as I can.
It happened that in the seventh year, of May
The third night (as old books say,
That tell all this story more fully),
Whether it was by chance or fate --
As, when a thing is pre-ordained, it must be --
That soon after midnight Palamon,
With the help of a friend, broke out of his prison
And flees the city as fast as he can go.
For he had so given his jailer drink 
Of a spiced and sweetened drink made of a certain wine,
With narcotics and pure opium of Thebes,
That all that night, though men would shake him,
The jailer slept; he could not awake.
And thus he flees as fast as ever he can.
The night was short and very close to the day
So that by necessity he must hide himself,
And to a grove close by 
With fearful foot then stalks Palamon.
For, shortly, this was his idea:
That in that grove he would hide himself all day,
And in the night then he would take his way
Toward Thebes, to pray his friends 
To help him to wage war on Theseus;
And shortly, he would either lose his life
Or win Emelye to be his wife.
This is the purpose and his full intent.
Now I will turn again to Arcite,
That little knew how near his trouble was,
To which Fortune had brought him in the snare.
The busy lark, messenger of day,
Salutes the morning gray in her song,
And fiery Phoebus rises up so bright
That all the orient laughs because of the light,
And with his rays dries in the groves
The silver drops hanging on the leaves.
And Arcite, who in the royal court
With Theseus is chief squire,
Is risen and looks on the merry day.
And to do his observance to May,
Meditating on the object of his desire,
He on a war horse, leaping about like the fire,
Has ridden into the fields to amuse himself,
Out of the court, about a mile or two.
And to the grove of which I told you 
By chance he began to hold his way 
To make himself a garland of the branches,
Were it of woodbine or hawthorn leaves,
And loud he sang in the bright sun:
"May, with all thy flowers and thy greenery,
Welcome be thou, fair, fresh May,
In hope that I can get something green."
And from his war horse, with an eager heart,
He rushed into the grove hastily,
And in a path he roams up and down,
Where by chance this Palamon
Was in a thicket, so that no man could see him,
For he was sorely afraid of his death.
In no way did he know that it was Arcite;
God knows he would scarcely have believed it
But truly it is said, since many years ago,
That "field has eyes and the wood has ears."
It is very good for a man to act calmly,
For every day people meet at unexpected times.
Arcite knows full little of his fellow,
Who was near enough to hear all his speech,
For in the thicket he sits now very still.
When Arcite had roamed all his fill,
And sung all the rondel cheerfully,
As these lovers do in their strange manners,
Now in the tree top, now down in the briars,
Now up, now down, like a bucket in a well.
Exactly like the Friday, truly for to tell,
Now it shines, now it rains hard,
Just so can fickle Venus sadden
The hearts of her folk; just as her day
Is changeable, just so she changes her array.
Friday is seldom like all the rest of the week.
When Arcite had sung, he began to sigh
And sat himself down without any more.
"Alas," he said, "that day that I was born!
How long, Juno, through thy cruelty,
Wilt thou make war on the city of Thebes?
Alas, to ruin is brought
The royal blood of Cadmus and Amphion --
Of Cadmus, who was the first man
Who built Thebes, before the town first began,
And first was crowned king of the city.
I am of his lineage and his offspring
By true lineage, of the royal family,
And now I am so wretched and so enslaved,
That he who is my mortal enemy,
I meekly serve him as his squire.
And yet Juno does me much more shame,
For I dare not acknowledge my own name;
But whereas I was accustomed to be called Arcite,
Now I am called Philostrate, not worth a penny.
Alas, thou fierce Mars! Alas, Juno!
Thus has your anger destroyed all our lineage,
Save only me and wretched Palamon,
Whom Theseus torments in prison.
And in addition to all this, to slay me utterly
Love has his fiery dart so ardently
Stabbed through my faithful, sorrowful heart
That my death was destined before my first garment was made.
You slay me with your eyes, Emelye!
You are the cause by which I die.
Of all the rest of my other troubles
I do not reckon at the value of a weed,
Provided that I could do anything to please you."
And with that word he fell down in a trance
A long time, and afterwards he leaped up.
This Palamon, that thought that through his heart
He felt a cold sword suddenly glide,
For anger he trembled; no longer would he wait.
And when he had heard Arcite's tale,
As if he were mad, with face dead and pale,
He leaped up out of the thick bushes 
And said: "Arcite, false, wicked traitor,
Now art thou taken, who lovest my lady so,
For whom that I have all this pain and woe,
And art of my blood, and sworn to be in my confidence,
As I full often have told thee before now,
And hast tricked here duke Theseus,
And thus hast falsely changed thy name!
I will be dead, or else thou shalt die.
Thou shalt not love my lady Emelye,
But I will love her only and no other;
For I am Palamon, thy mortal foe.
And though I have no weapon in this place,
But out of prison am escaped by good luck,
I doubt not that either thou shalt dye,
Either thou shalt not love Emelye,
Choose which thou wish, or thou shalt not escape!"
This Arcite, with full spiteful heart,
When he knew him, and had heard his tale,
As fierce as a lion pulled out his sword,
And said thus: "By God who sits above,
Were it not that thou art sick and mad for love,
And also because thou hast no weapon in this place,
Thou shouldest never walk out of this grove,
Rather thou shouldest die of my hand. 
For I repudiate the pledge and the bond
Which thou sayest that I have made to thee.
Lo! True fool, think well that love is free,
And I will love her in spite of all thy might!
But for as much as thou art a worthy knight
And desire to decide the right to her by battle,
Have here my pledge; tomorrow I will not fail,
Without the knowledge of any other person,
But here I will be found as a knight,
And bring armor right enough for thee;
And choose the best, and leave the worst for me.
And food and drink this night will I bring
Enough for thee, and bed-clothes for thy bedding.
And if it so be that thou win my lady,
And slay me in this wood where I am in,
Thou mayest well have thy lady as far as I am concerned."
This Palamon answered, "I agree."
And thus they are departed until morning,
When each of them had laid his faith as a pledge.
O Cupid, devoid of all kindness to others!
O reign, that will have no partner with thee!
Full truly it is said that love nor lordship
Will not, willingly, have any partnership.
Arcite and Palamon well find that (to be true).
Arcite has ridden immediately into the town,
And on the morning, before it was day's light,
Very secretly he has prepared two sets of armor,
Both sufficient and suitable to decide
The battle in the field between them two;
And on his horse, alone as he was born,
He carries all the armor before him.
And in the grove, at time and place set,
This Arcite and this Palamon are met.
The color in their faces began to change;
Just as the hunters in the reign of Thrace,
He who stands at the gap in the forrest with a spear,
When the lion or the bear is hunted,
And hears him come rushing in the bushes,
And breaks both boughs and the leaves,
And thinks, "Here comes my mortal enemy!
Without fail, he must be dead, or I,
For either I must slay him at the gap,
Or he must slay me, if I suffer misfortune."
So fared they in changing colors of their faces,
When each of them knew the other.
There was no 'good day,' nor no salutations,
But straightway, without word or conversing,
Each one of them helped to arm the other
As friendly as if he were his own brother;
And after that, with sharp strong spears 
They thrust at each other a wonderfully long time.
Thou mightest suppose that this Palamon
In his fighting was a mad lion,
And Arcite was like a cruel tiger;
They began to smite like wild boars,
That froth at the mouth white as foam for mad anger. 
They fought up to the ankle in their blood.
And in this manner I leave them to remain fighting,
And forth I will tell you of Theseus.
The destiny, general minister,
That executes in the world everywhere
The providence that God has foreseen,
So strong it is that, though the world had sworn
The contrary of a thing by yes or no,
Yet sometimes it shall happen on one day
That happens not again in a thousand years. 
For certainly, our desires here,
Be it of war, or peace, or hate, or love,
All this is ruled by the foresight above.
I mean this now in regard to mighty Theseus,
Who is so desirous to hunt,
And especially at the large hart in May,
That in his bed there dawns for him no day
That he is not clad, and ready to ride
With huntsman and horn and hounds beside him.
For in his hunting he has such delight
That it is all his joy and desire
To be himself the large hart's slayer,
For next to Mars he now serves Diana.
The day was clear, as I have told before this,
And Theseus with all joy and bliss,
With his Ypolita, the faire queen,
And Emelye, clothed all in green,
On hunting they are ridden royally.
And to the grove that stood very close by,
In which there was a hart, so people told him,
Duke Theseus has held the straight way.
And directly to the glade he rides,
For through there the hart was accustomed to take his escape,
And (flee) over a brook, and so forth on his way.
This duke will have a run or two at him
With such hounds as he pleases to command.
And when this duke was come unto the glade,
He looks toward the sun, and immediately
He was aware of Arcite and Palamon,
Who fought as fiercely as if it were two wild boars.
The bright swords went to and fro
So hideously that with the weakest stroke
It seemed as if it would fell an oak.
But who they were, he knew nothing.
This duke smote his warhorse with his spurs,
And with a sudden leap he was between them two,
And pulled out a sword and cried, "Stop!
No more, on the penalty of the loss of your head!
By mighty Mars, he shall at once be dead
Who smites any stroke that I can see.
But tell me what sort of men you are,
Who are so bold as to fight here
Without judge or other officer,
As it would be in a properly conducted duel,"
This Palamon answered hastily
And said, "Sire, what more words are needed?
We have deserved the death, both of us two.
Two woeful wretches are we, two miserable people,
Who are burdened down by our own lives;
And as thou art a rightful lord and judge,
Give us neither mercy nor refuge,
But slay me first, by holy charity!
But slay my fellow also as well as me;
Or slay him first, for though thou little knowest it,
This is thy mortal foe, this is Arcite,
Who is banished from thy land on (pain of losing) his head,
For which he has deserved to be dead.
For this is he that came unto thy gate
And said that he was called  Philostrate.
Thus has he tricked thee for many years,
And thou hast made him thy chief squire;
And this is he that loves Emelye.
For since the day is come that I must dye,
I make plainly my confession
That I am that same woeful Palamon
That wickedly has broken (out of) thy prison.
I am thy mortal foe, and it is I
Who loves the beautiful Emelye so passionately 
That I will die at this moment in her sight.
Therefore I ask death and my judicial sentence;
But slay my fellow in the same way,
For we have both deserved to be slain."
This worthy duke answered at once in reply,
And said, "This is a brief (easy) decision. 
Your own mouth, by your confession,
Has condemned you, and I will pronounce it;
There is no deed to torture you with the cord.
You shall be dead, by mighty Mars the red!"
The queen at once, for true womanliness,
Began to weep, and so did Emelye,
And all the ladies in the company.
Great pity was it, as it seemed to them all,
That ever such a misfortune should occur,
For they were gentle men of high rank,
And this debate was for nothing but love;
And saw their bloody wounds wide and sore,
And all cried, both low ranking and high,
"Have mercy, Lord, upon all of us women!"
And they fall down on their bare knees 
And would have kissed his feet there where he stood;
Until at the last his mood was calmed,
For pity comes soon to a gentle heart.
And though he first for anger shook and trembled,
He has considered shortly, in brief,
The trespass of them both, and also the cause,
And although his anger reproached them for their guilt,
Yet in his reason he excused them both,
As thus: he thought well that every man
Will help himself in love, if he can,
And also deliver himself out of prison.
And also his heart had compassion
Of women, for they weep continually,
And in his gentle heart he thought straightway,
And softly to himself he said, "Fie
Upon a lord that will have no mercy,
But be a lion, both in word and deed,
To those who are in repentance and fear,
As well as to a proud, spiteful man
Who will persist in what he first began.
That lord has little sound judgment,
That in such cases knows no distinctions
But considers pride and humility equal."
And shortly, when his anger is thus gone,
He began to look up with bright eyes 
And spoke these same words all aloud:
"The god of love, ah, bless my soul!
How mighty and how great a lord is he!
Against his power there avail no obstacles.
He may be called a god for his miracles,
For he can make, as he pleases,
Of every heart whatever he wants to devise.
Lo here this Arcite and this Palamon,
Who freely were out of my prison,
And could have lived royally in Thebes,
And know I am their mortal enemy,
And that their death lies in my power also,
And yet has Love, despite anything they could do,
Brought them both hither to die.
Now look, is that not a great folly?
Who can be a fool unless he is in love?
Behold, for the sake of God who sits above,
See how they bleed! Are they not in fine condition?
Thus has their lord, the god of love, paid
Their wages and their fees for their service!
And yet they consider themselves very wise,
Those who serve love, whatever may happen.
But this is yet the best joke of all,
That she for whom they have this sport
Owes them as much gratitude for this as she owes me.
She knows no more of all this passionate business,
By God, than knows a cuckoo or a hare!
But all must be tried, hot or cold; 
A man must be a fool, either young or old --
I know it by my own experience very long ago,
For in my time I was a servant (of love).
And therefore, since I know of love's pain
And know how sorely it can afflict a man,
As one who has been often caught in its snare,
I wholly forgive you this trespass,
At the request of the queen, who kneels here,
And also of Emelye, my dear sister.
And you must both immediately swear unto me 
That you shall never more harm my country,
Nor make war upon me at any time,
But be my friends in all that you can.
I forgive you this trespass completely."
And they fairly and well swore to him (to do) his request,
And prayed him to be their lord and to have mercy ,
And he grants them his favor, and thus he said:
"To speak of royal lineage and riches,
Though she were a queen or a princess,
Each of you both is worthy, doubtless,
To wed when it is time; but none the less --
I speak for my sister Emelye,
For whom you have this strife and jealousy --
You know yourself she can not wed two
At once, though you were to fight for evermore,
That one of you, whether he likes it or not, 
He must go whistle in an ivy leaf;
This is to say, she can not now have both,
Although you be never so jealous nor so angry.
And therefore I put you in this situation,
That each of you shall have his destiny
As is ordained for him, and listen in what way;
Lo, hear what I shall arrange for your fate.
My will is this, for flat conclusion,
Without any arguing --
If this pleases you, take it for the best:
That each one of you shall go where he pleases
Freely, without ransom or resistance,
And fifty weeks from this day, more or less,
Each one of you shall bring a hundred knights
Armed up for the lists in all respects,
All ready to decide the right to her by battle.
And this I promise you without fail,
Upon my word, and as I am a knight,
That whichever of you both who has the power --
This is to say, that whether he or thou
Can with his hundred, as I spoke of now,
Slay his opponent, or drive him out of the lists ,
Then I shall give Emelye as wife
To whom Fortune gives so good a gift (to win the battle).
I shall make the lists in this place,
And as God may surely have pity on my soul
I shall be an impartial and true judge.
You shall make no other agreement with me,
(Save this:) that one of you must be dead or taken.
And if it seems to you that this is well said,
Say your opinion, and consider yourself satisfied.
This is your (destined) end and your conclusion."
Who but Palamon looks happy now?
Who springs up for joy but Arcite?
Who could tell, or who could describe in writing,
The joy that is made in the place
When Theseus has behaved so graciously?
But down on knees went every sort of person,
And thanked him with all their heart and might,
And especially the Thebans many times.
And thus with good hope and with happy heart
They take their leave, and homeward did they ride
To Thebes with his old wide walls.
I suppose men would consider it negligence
If I forget to tell the expenditure
Of Theseus, who goes (about) so busily
To build the lists royally,
That such a noble theatre as it was
I dare well say there was not (another such) in this world.
The circumference was a mile around,
Walled with stone, and surrounded by a ditch.
Round was the shape, in the manner of a circle,
Full of tiers of seats, the height of sixty paces,
That when a man was set on one tier of seats,
He did not hinder his fellow from seeing.
Eastward there stood a gate of white marble,
Westward just such another on the opposite (side).
And shortly to conclude, such a place
Was none in earth, (constructed) in so little time;
For in the land there was no skilled man
Who knows geometry or arithmetic,
Nor painter, nor carver of images,
That Theseus did not give him food and wages
To make and devise the theatre.
And to do his rite and sacrifice,
He has eastward, upon the gate above,
In worship of Venus, goddess of love,
Had made an altar and a chapel;
And on the westward gate, in memory
Of Mars, he has made just such another,
That cost fully a cartload of gold.
And northward, in a turret on the wall,
Of white alabaster and red coral,
A chapel, rich to look upon,
In worship of Diana of chastity,
Has Theseus had made in noble style.
But yet had I forgotten to describe
The noble sculpture and the portraits,
The shape, the appearance, and the figures
That were in these three chapels.
First in the temple of Venus canst thou see
Wrought on the wall, full piteous to behold,
The broken sleeps, and the cold sighs,
The sacred tears, and the lamenting,
The fiery strokes of the desiring
That love's servants endure in this life;
The oaths that assure their covenants;
Pleasure and Hope, Desire, Foolhardiness,
Beauty and Youth, Mirth, Riches,
Charms and Force, Lies, Flattery,
Expenditures, Attentiveness, and Jealousy,
Who wore a garland of yellow marigolds,
And a cuckoo sitting on her hand;
Feasts, musical instruments, dance-songs, dances,
Desire and festivity, and all the details
Of love, which I recounted and shall recount,
Were painted in sequence on the wall,
And more than I can make mention of.
For truly all the mount of Cithaeron,
Where Venus has her principal dwelling,
Was shown on the wall in portraits,
With all the garden (of Love) and the pleasure.
The porter, Idleness, was not forgotten 
Nor the handsome Narcissus of many years ago,
Nor yet the folly of king Solomon,
Nor yet the great strength of Hercules --
The enchantments of Medea and Circes --
Nor of Turnus, with the hardy fierce courage,
The riche Cresus, wretched in servitude.
Thus can you see that wisdom nor riches,
Beauty nor trickery, strength nor bravery,
Can not share power with Venus,
For she may rule the world as she pleases.
Lo, all these folk were so caught in her snare,
Until for woe they very often said "alas!"
One or two examples here suffice,
Even though I could recount a thousand more.
The statue of Venus, glorious to look upon,
Was naked, floating in the large sea,
And from the navel down all was covered 
With waves green and bright as any glass.
She had a citole (zither-like instrument) in her right hand,
And on her head, very elegant to look upon,
A rose garland, fresh and fragrant;
Above her head her doves fluttering.
Before her stood her son Cupid;
He had two wings upon his shoulders,
And he was blind, as it is often seen;
He carried a bow and arrows bright and keen.
Why should I not as well also tell you all
The portraiture that was upon the wall
Within the temple of mighty Mars the red?
All painted was the wall, in length and breadth,
Like to the interior of the grisly place
That is called the Great Temple of Mars in Thrace,
In that same cold, frosty region
Where Mars has his most excellent mansion.  
First a forest was painted on the wall,
In which there dwells neither man nor beast,
With knotty, gnarled, barren old trees,
Of stumps sharp and hideous to behold,
Through which there ran a rumbling in a moaning of wind,
As though a storm should burst every bough.
And downward from a hill, close to a grassy slope,
There stood the temple of Mars, powerful in arms,
Wrought all of burnished steel, of which the entry
Was long and narrow, and frightening to look upon.  
And out of there came a rush of wind and such a blast
That it made all the gate to shake.
The northern light shone in at the doors,
For there was no window on the wall,
Through which men might discern any light.
The door was all of eternal adamant (hardest of stones),
Bound crosswise and lengthwise 
With tough iron; and to make it strong,
Every pillar, to support the temple,
Was big as a large barrel, (made) of iron bright and shining.
There I saw first the malicious plotting
Of Felony, and all the scheming;
The cruel Anger, red as any glowing coal;
The pick-purse, and also the pale Fear;
The smiler with the knife under the cloak;
The stable burning with the black smoke;
The treason of the murdering in the bed;
The open war, all covered with blood from wounds:
Strife, with bloody knife and sharp menacing.
All full of creaking was that sorry place.
There yet I saw slayer of himself there --
His heart-blood has bathed all his hair --
The nail driven in the top of the head at night;
The cold death, with mouth gaping upwards.
Amidst the temple sat Misfortune,
With grief and sorry countenance.
Yet I saw Madness, laughing in his rage,
Armed Discontent, Alarm, and fierce Violence;
The corpse in the woods, with (its) throat cut;
A thousand slain, and not killed by the plague;
The tyrant, with his prey taken by force;
The town destroyed, there was nothing left.
Yet I saw burned the ships dancing (on the waves);
The hunter killed by the wild bears;
The sow devouring the child right in the cradle;
The cook scalded, despite his long-handled spoon.
Nothing concerning the evil influence of Mars was forgotten.
The wagon driver run over by his wagon --   
He lay down full low under the wheel.
There were also, of those influenced by Mars,
The barber, and the butcher, and the smith,
Who forges sharp swords on his anvil.
And all above, painted in a tower,
I saw conquest, sitting in great honor,
With the sharp sword over his head
Hanging by a thin thread of twine.
Depicted was the slaughter of Julius,
Of great Nero, and of Antonius;
Although at that same time they were unborn,
Yet was their death depicted before then
By menacing of Mars, according to the horoscope;
So was it shown in that portraiture,
As is depicted in the stars above
Who shall be slain or else dead for love.
Suffices one illustrative tale in old histories; 
I can not recount them all even if I desired to.
The statue of Mars stood upon a chariot
Armed, and looked as grim as if he were mad;
And over his head there shine two figures
Of stars, that are called in books,
That one Puella, that other Rubeus --
This god of arms was arrayed thus.
A wolf stood there before him at his feet
With red eyes, and he ate of a man;
With subtle brush was depicted this story
In reverence of Mars and of his glory.
Now to the temple of Diana the chaste,
As briefly as I can, I will hasten myself,
To tell you all the description.
The walls are painted all over
(With scenes) of hunting and of modest chastity.
There I saw how woeful Callisto,
When Diana was angry with her,
Was turned from a woman into a bear,
And after she was made the North Star
Thus was it painted; I can tell you no more.
Her son is also a star, as one can see.
There I saw Daphne, turned into a tree --
I mean not the goddess Diana,
But Penneus' daughter, who is called Daphne.
There I saw Actaeon changed into a hart,
For vengeance that he saw Diana all naked;
I saw how his hounds have caught him 
And devoured him, because they did not know him.
Yet was painted a little further on 
How Atalanta hunted the wild boar,
And Meleager, and many more others,
For which Diana wrought him care and woe.
There I saw many another wonderful story,
The which I do not desire to call to mind.
This goddess sat full high on a hart,
With small hounds all about her feet,
And underneath her feet she had a moon --
Waxing it was and should wane soon.
Her statue was clothed in yellowish green,
With bow in hand and arrows in a quiver.
She cast her eyes down full low 
Where Pluto has his dark region.
A woman in childbirth was before her;
But because her child was so long unborn,
Very piteously did she call on Lucina 
And said, "Help, for thou canst (do so) best of all!"
He who made it well knew how to paint in a life-like manner;
With many a florin he bought the paints.
Now these lists are made, and Theseus,
Who at his great cost thus prepared
The temples and the theatre in all respects,
When it was done, it greatly pleased him.
But I will stop speaking of Theseus a little while,
And speak of Palamon and of Arcite.
The day of their return approaches,
When each one should bring a hundred knights
To decide the battle, as I told you.
And to Athens, to keep their agreement,
Each one of them has brought a hundred knights,
Well armed for the battle in all respects.
And surely many a man there believed
That never, since the world began,
To speak of knighthood of (the deeds of) their hand,
As far as God has made sea or land,
Was not of so few so noble a company.
For every person that loved chivalry
And would, willingly, have an outstanding reputation
Has prayed that he might participate in that game;
And well it was for him who was chosen to be there,
For if there fell tomorrow such a situation,
You know well that every vigorous  knight
Who loves passionately and has his might,
Were it in England or elsewhere,
They would, willingly, desire to be there --
To fight for a lady, bless me! 
It would be a pleasing sight to see.
And right so fared those with Palamon.
With him there went knights many a one;
One of them will be armed in a coat of mail,
And in a breastplate and a light tunic;
And one of them will have a set of plate armor;
And one of them will have a Prussian shield or a buckler;
One of them will be well armed on his legs,
And have an axe, and one a mace of steel --
There is no new fashion that has not been old.
They were armed, as I have told you,
Every one according to his preference.
There mayst thou seen, coming with Palamon,
Lycurgus himself, the great king of Thrace.
Black was his beard, and manly was his face;
The circles of his eyes in his head,
They glowed between yellow and red,
And he looked about like a griffin (with an eagle's head),
With shaggy hairs on his stout brows;
His limbs large, his muscles hard and strong,
His shoulders broad, his arms round and long;
And as was the fashion in his country,
He stood full high upon a chariot of gold,
With four white bulls in the traces.
Instead of a tunic with his coat of arms over his armor,
With claws yellow and bright as any gold, 
He had a bear's skin, coal-black because of age.
His long hair was combed behind his back;
Like any raven's feather it shone because of its blackness;
A wreath of gold, thick as an arm, of huge weight,
Upon his head, set full of bright stones,
Of fine rubies and of diamonds.
About his chariot there went white wolfhounds,
Twenty and more, as big as any steer,
To hunt for the lion or the deer,
And followed him with muzzles securely bound,
Wearing collars of gold, and rings for leashes filed round.
He had a hundred lords in his company,
Very well armed, with stern and stout hearts.
With Arcite, as people find in histories,
The great Emetreus, the king of India,
Upon a reddish-brown steed with trappings of steel,
Covered in cloth of gold, well decorated  (with geometric patterns),
Came riding like the god of arms, Mars.
His tunic with his coat of arms was of cloth of Tarsia (in Turkestan)
Adorned with pearls white and round and big;
His saddle was newly adorned with pure gold;
A short cloak hanging upon his shoulder,
Brimful of rubies red as sparkling fire;
His curly hair like rings was run (fashioned),
And that was yellow, and glittered like the sun.
His nose was high, his eyes bright lemon yellow,
His lips round, his color was ruddy;
A few freckles were sprinkled in his face,
Between yellow and somewhat mingled with black;
And as a lion he cast about his look.
I reckon his age at five and twenty years.
His beard had well begun to spring;
His voice was like a trumpet thundering.
Upon his head he wore of green laurel 
A garland, fresh and pleasing to look upon.
Upon his hand he carried for his delight
A tame eagle, white as any lily.
He had a hundred lords with him there,
All armed, except for their heads, in all their equipment,
Very richly in every detail.
For trust well that dukes, earls, kings
Were gathered in this noble company,
For love and for the benefit of chivalry.
About this king there ran on all sides  
Full many a tame lion and leopard.
And in this manner these lords, one and all,
Are come to the city on the Sunday 
About nine a.m., and in the town dismounted.
This Theseus, this duke, this worthy knight,
When he had brought them into his city,
And provided them lodging, each one according to his rank,
He feasts them, and does such great labor
To entertain them and do them all honor
That people still believe that the wit of no man
Of any rank could do better.
The music, the service at the feast,
The great gifts to every one,
The rich adornment of Theseus' palace,
Nor who sat first nor last upon the dais,
What ladies are fairest or best in dancing,
Or which of them can dance best and sing,
Nor who speaks most feelingly of love;
What hawks sit on the perch above,
What hounds lie down on the floor --
I now make no mention of all this,
But (speak only) of the substance; that seems to me the best.
Now comes the point, and listen if you please.
The Sunday night, before day began to spring,
When Palamon heard the lark sing
(Although it was not day by two hours,
Yet sang the lark) and Palamon right then
With pious heart and with a noble disposition,
He rose to go on his pilgrimage
To the blessed gracious Citherea --
I mean Venus, honorable and worshipful.
And in her (planetary) hour he walks forth slowly
Unto the lists where her temple was,
And down he kneels, and with humble expression
And painful heart he said as you shall hear:
"Fairest of the fair, O lady mine, Venus,
Daughter to Jove and spouse of Vulcan,
Thou maker of joy of the mount of Citheron,
For that same love thou haddest to Adonis,
Have pity on my bitter, smarting tears,
And take my humble prayer to thy heart.
Alas! I do not have any language to tell
The effects nor the torments of my hell;
My heart can not reveal my harms;
I am so befuddled that I can not say (anything)
But `Mercy, lady bright, who knowest well
My thought and seest what harms I feel!'
Consider all this and have pity upon my pain,
As surely as I shall for evermore,
According to my power (as much as I can), be thy true servant,
And make war always against chastity.
I make that my vow, providing you help me!
I care not to boast of arms 
Nor do I ask to have victory tomorrow,
Nor renown in this case, nor vain glory
Nor fame for deeds of arms proclaimed everywhere;
But I would have fully possession
Of Emelye, and die in thy service.
Find thou the manner how and in what way:
I care not if it may better be
To have victory over them, or they over me,
So that I have my lady in my arms.
For though it be true that Mars is god of arms,
Your power is so great in heaven above
That if you please, I shall well have my love.
I will worship thy temple evermore,
And on thy altar, whether I ride or walk (whatever I do),
I will do sacrifice and kindle fires.
And if you will not (do) so, my lady sweet,
Then I pray thee, tomorrow with a spear
That Arcite stab me through the heart.
Then I care not, when I have lost my life,
Though Arcite win her to be his wife.
This is the substance and goal of my prayer:
Give me my love, thou blessed dear lady."
When the prayer of Palamon was done,
He did his sacrifice, and that quickly,
Full piteously, with all due ceremony,
Although I tell not now his observances;
But at the last the statue of Venus shook,
And made a sign, whereby he understood
That his prayer was accepted that day.
For though the sign showed a delay,
Yet he knew well that his request was granted,
And with glad heart he went home very soon.
The third planetary hour after Palamon
Began to go to Venus' temple,
Up rose the sun, and up rose Emelye
And to the temple of Diana did hasten.
Her maidens, whom she led thither with her,
They had the fire full readily with them,
The incense, the cloths, and all the rest
That is needed for the sacrifice;
The horns full of mead, as was the custom --
There lacked nothing (needed) to do her sacrifice.
The temple smoking (with incense), full of fair cloths,
This Emelye, with gentle heart,
Washed her body with water of a well.
But how she did her rite I dare not tell,
Unless it be some thing in general; 
And yet it would be a pleasure to hear all.
To one who means well it would be no matter of concern;
But it is good for a man to be without restriction (speak freely).
Her bright hair was combed, all loose;
A crown of an evergreen oak 
Was set upon her head full fair and suitable.
Two fires on the altar did she kindle,
And did her duties, as men can behold
In Statius' <i>Thebaid</i> and such old books.
When the fire was kindled, with a pitiful expression
Unto Diana she spoke as you may hear:
"O chaste goddess of the green woods,
To whom both heaven and earth and sea is visible,
Queen of the dark and low reign of Pluto,
Goddess of maidens, whom my heart hast known
Full many a year, and knowest what I desire,
Keep me from thy vengeance and thy ire,
Which Acteon paid for cruelly.
Chaste goddess, well knowest thou that I
Desire to be a maiden all my life,
Nor never will I be no lover nor wife.
I am, thou knowest, yet of thy company,
A maiden, and love hunting and the chase,
And to walk in the wild woods,
And not to be a wife and be with child.
I do not desire to know company of man.
Now help me, lady, since you can and know how,
For those three forms that thou hast in thee.
And Palamon, that has such love to me,
And also Arcite, who loves me so painfully,
This grace I pray thee and ask no more,
Send love and peace between them two,
And turn away their hearts from me so
That all their hot love and their desire,
And all their intense torment, and their fire
Will be quenched, or turned to another place.
And if it so be thou wilt not do me grace,
Or if my destiny is shaped so
That I must by necessity have one of them two,
Send me him who most desires me.
Behold, goddess of clean chastity,
The bitter tears that fall on my cheeks.
Since thou art maiden and guardian of us all,
Thou care for and well conserve my maidenhood,
And while I live, as a maiden I will serve thee."
The fires burn brightly upon the altar,
While Emelye was thus in her prayer.
But suddenly she saw a curious sight,
For right away one of the fires quenched
And rekindled again, and after that straightway
That other fire was quenched and all gone;
And as it quenched it made a roaring sound,
As these wet brands do in their burning,
And at the brand's end (the fire) ran out straightway
As if it were many bloody drops;
For which so sorely frightened was Emelye
That she was well nigh mad and began to cry,
For she did not know what it signified,
But simply for fear has she cried thus,
And wept that it was a pity to hear.
And right then Diana did appear,
With bow in hand, just like a huntress,
And said, "Daughter, cease thy sadness.
Among the high gods it is affirmed,
And by eternal word written and confirmed,
Thou shalt be wedded unto one of those
Who have for thee so much care and woe,
But unto which of them I may not tell.
Farwell, for I can stay no longer .
The fires which burn on my altar 
Shall declare to thee, before thou go hence,
Thy destiny concerning love, as in this situation."
And with that word, the arrows in the quiver
Of the goddess clatter fast and ring,
And forth she went and vanished;
For which this Emelye was astonished,
And said, "What does this mean, alas?
I put me in thy protection,
Diana, and in thy power."
And home she goes at once the nearest way.
This is the substance; there is no more to say.
The next (planetary) hour of Mars following this,
Arcite has walked unto the temple 
Of fierce Mars to do his sacrifice,
With all the rites of his pagan manner (of worship).
With sorrowful heart and intense devotion,
Right thus to Mars he said his prayer:
"O strong god, who in the cold reigns 
Of Thrace art honored and considered lord,
And hast in every reign and every land
All the control of arms in thy hand,
And grants them fortune as it pleases thee to command.
Accept of me my sorrowful sacrifice.
If it so be that my youth may deserve,
And that my power be worthy to serve
Thy godhead, so that I may be one of thine,
Then pray I thee to have pity upon my pain.
For that same pain and that same hot fire
In which thou once burned for desire,
When that thou enjoyed the beauty
Of fair, young, fresh Venus the noble,
And haddest her in arms as you wished --
Although once things went wrong for you,
When Vulcan had caught thee in his snare
And found thee lying by his wife, alas! --
For that same sorrow that was in thy heart,
Have pity as well upon my painful sufferings. 
I am young and ignorant, as thou knowest,
And, as I suppose, injured most by love 
Than ever was any living creature,
For she that causes me to endure all this woe 
Nor cares never whether I sink or swim.
And well I know, before she may promise me mercy,
I must win her with strength in the lists,
And well I know, without help or grace
Of thee my strength can not avail.
Then help me, lord, tomorrow in my battle,
For that same fire that once burned thee,
As well as that same fire now burns me,
And bring it about so that I have victory tomorrow.
Mine be the labor, and thine be the glory!
I will most honor thy most excellent temple
Over any place, and always most labor
In thy pleasure and in thy strong crafts,
And in thy temple I will hang my banner 
And all the arms of my company,
And evermore, until that day I die,
Eternal fire I will provide before thee (on your altar).
And also I will bind myself to this vow:
My beard, my hair, that hangs long down,
That never yet felt injury
Of razor nor of shears, I will give thee,
And be thy true servant while I live.
Now, lord, have pity upon my painful sorrows;
Give me victory; I ask of thee no more."
The prayer of Arcite the strong stopped,
The rings that hung on the temple door,
And also the doors, clattered very fast,
Of which Arcite was somewhat afraid.
The fires upon the altar burned (so) brightly 
That it began to illuminate all the temple;
A sweet smell the ground at once yielded up,
And Arcite immediately raised up his hand,
And he cast more incense into the fire,
With more other rites; and at the last
The statue of Mars began to ring its coat of mail,
And with that sound he heard a murmuring
Very low and faint, that said thus, "Victory!"
For which he (Arcite) gave to Mars honor and glory.
And thus with joy and hope to fare well
Arcite at once is gone unto his lodging,
As happy as a fowl is for the bright sun.
And right away such strife there is begun,
Because of that same grant, in the heaven above, 
Between Venus, the goddess of love,
And Mars, the stern god powerful in arms,
That Jupiter was hard put to stop it,
Until the pale Saturn the hostile,
Who knew so many of old adventures,
Found in his old experience a plan
That he full soon has pleased every side.
As is truly said, old age has a great advantage;
In old age is both wisdom and experience;
One can outrun the old but not outwit them.
Saturn anon, to stop strife and fear,  
Although it is against his natural disposition,
He found a remedy for all this strife.
"My dear daughter Venus," said Saturn,
"My orbit, that has so wide (a course) to turn,
Has more power than any man knows.
Mine is the drowning in the sea so dark;
Mine is the imprisonment in the dark cell;
Mine is the killing and hanging by the throat,
The murmur (of discontent) and the churls' rebelling,
The grumbling, and the secret poisoning;
I exact vengeance and do full punishment,
While I dwell in the (zodiacal) sign of the lion.
Mine is the ruin of the high halls,
The falling of the towers and of the walls
Upon the miner or the carpenter.
I slew Sampson, shaking the pillar;
And mine are the cold maladies,
The dark treasons, and the old plots;
My (astrological) aspect is the father of pestilence.
Now weep no more; I shall do my diligence
So that Palamon, who is thine own knight,
Shall have his lady, as thou hast promised him.
Though Mars shall help his knight, yet nonetheless
Between you there must be peace sometime,
Although you are not of one (the same) temperament,
Which daily causes such dissension.
I am thy grandfather, ready (to do) as you wish;
Weep now no more; I will fulfill thy desire."
Now I will stop (speaking) of the gods above,
Of Mars, and of Venus, goddess of love,
And tell you as plainly as I can
The essential part, for which I began.
Once, as old histories tell us,
There was a duke who was called Theseus;
He was lord and governor of Athens,
And in his time such a conqueror
That there was no one greater under the sun.
Very many a powerful country had he won;
What with his wisdom and his chivalry,
He conquered all the land of the Amazons,
That once was called Scithia,
And wedded the queen Ypolita,
And brought her home with him into his country
With much glory and great ceremony,
And also her young sister Emelye.
And thus with victory and with festivity
I leave this noble duke riding to Athens,
And all his host in arms beside him.
And certainly, if it were not too long to hear,
I would have told you fully the manner
How the reign of Femenye was won
By Theseus and by his chivalry;
And of the great battle at that time
Between Athenians and Amazons;
And how Ypolita was besieged,
The fair, bold queen of Scithia;
And of the festivity that was at their wedding,
And of the storm at her home-coming;
But all that matter I must now forgo. 
I have, God knows, a large field to till,
And the oxen in my plow are weak.
The remnant of the tale is long enough.
Also I will not hinder any one of this company;
Let every fellow tell his tale in turn,
And let's see now who shall win the supper;
And where I left off, I will again begin.
This duke, of whom I make mention,
When he was come almost unto the town,
In all his prosperity and in his most pride,
He was aware, as he cast his eye aside,
Where there kneeled in the high way
A company of ladies, two by two,
Each after another, clad in black clothes;
But such a cry and such a woeful (lament) they make
That in this world is no living creature 
That (ever) heard lamentation such as this;
And of this cry they would not ever stop
Until they seized the reins of his bridle.
"What folk are you, who at my homecoming
So disturb my festival with crying?"
Said Theseus. "Have you such great envy
Of my honor, (you) who thus lament and cry?
Or who has injured or offended you?
And tell me if it may be remedied,
And why you are clothed thus in black."
The eldest lady of them all spoke,
After she had swooned with (so) deadly a countenance,
That it was pitiful to see and hear;
She said, "Lord, to whom Fortune has given
Victory, and (allowed) to live as a conqueror,
Your glory and your honor does not grieve us,
But we beseech (you for) mercy and succor.
Have mercy on our woe and our distress!
Some drop of pity, because of thy nobility,
Let thou fall upon us wretched women,
For, certainly, lord, there is not one of us all
Who has not been a duchesse or a queen.
Now we are miserable wretches, as it is easily seen,
Thanks be to Fortune and her false wheel,
Who assures no estate (will continue) to be well.
And certainly, lord, to await your presence,
Here in this temple of the goddess Clemency
We have been waiting all this fortnight.
Now help us, lord, since it is in thy power.
"I, wretch, who weep and wail thus,
Was once wife to king Cappaneus,
Who died at Thebes -- cursed be that day! --
And all of us who are in this condition
And make all this lamentation,
We lost all our husbands at that town,
While the siege lay around it.
And yet now the old Creon -- woe oh woe! --
Who is now lord of the city of Thebes,
Filled with anger and with iniquity,
He, for spite and for his tyranny,
To do dishonor to the dead bodies
Of all our lords who are slain,
Has dragged all the bodies in a heap,
And will not allow them, not at all, 
Neither to be buried nor burned,
But makes hounds eat them as an insult."
And with that word, without more delay,
They fell face down and cried piteously,
"Have some mercy on us wretched women,
And let our sorrow sink in thy heart."
This gentle duke leaped down from his war horse
With compassionate heart, when he heard them speak.
It seemed to him that his heart would break,
When he saw them so pitiful and so dejected,
That once were of such high rank;
And in his arms he caught up them all,
And comforts them with very good will,
And swore his oath, as he was true knight,
(That) he would do his might so completely
To avenge them upon the tyrant Creon 
That all the people of Greece should speak (about)
How Creon was treated by Theseus
As one who had very well deserved his death.
And right away, without more delay,
He displays his banner, and rode forth 
Toward Thebes, and all his army beside (him).
He would not walk nor ride any nearer to Athens,
Nor take his ease fully half a day,
But that night he lay (camped) on his way,
And sent straightway Ypolita the queen,
And Emelye, her beautiful young sister,
Unto the town of Athens to dwell,
And forth he rides; there is no more to tell.
The red statue of Mars, with spear and shield,
So shines in his large white banner
That all the fields glitter all around;
And by his banner is carried his pennon
Of very rich gold, in which there was embroidered
The Minotaur, which he defeated in Crete.
Thus rides this duke, thus rides this conqueror,
And in his army the flower of chivalry,
Until he came to Thebes and dismounted
Graciously in a field, where he intended to fight.
But briefly to speak of this thing,
With Creon, who was king of Thebes,
He fought, and slew him boldly as a knight
In open battle, and put the army to flight;
And by assault he won the city afterwards,
And tore down both wall and beam and rafter;
And he gave back to the ladies 
The bones of their husbands who were slain,
To do obsequies, as was then the custom.
But it would be all too long to describe 
The great clamor and the lamentation
That the ladies made at the burning
Of the bodies, and the great honor
That Theseus, the noble conqueror,
Does to the ladies, when they went from him;
But briefly to tell is my intent.
When this worthy duke, this Theseus,
Has slain Creon and thus won Thebes,
Still in that field he took all night his rest,
And did with all the country as he pleased.
To search in the heap of dead bodies,
To strip them of armor and of clothing,
The scavengers took great pains and worked hard
After the battle and defeat.
And (it) so befell that in the heap they found,
Pierced through with many a grievous bloody wound,
Two young knights lying side by side,
Both with the same coat of arms, very richly wrought,
Of which two one was called Arcite,
And that other knight was called Palamon.
They were not fully alive, nor fully dead,
But by their coats of arms and by their equipment
The heralds best knew them in particular
As they that were of the royal blood 
Of Thebes, and born of two sisters.
The scavengers have pulled them out of the heap,
And have carried them softy unto the tent
Of Theseus; and he very soon sent them 
To Athens, to dwell in prison
Perpetually -- he would not (accept) any ransom.
And when this worthy duke has thus done,
He took his army, and home he rides straightway
As a conqueror crowned with laurel;
And there he lives in joy and in honor
For the duration of his life; what more words are needed?
And in a tower, in anguish and in woe,
This Palamon and his fellow Arcite
For evermore (remain); no gold can ransom them.
This passes year by year and day by day,
Until it befell once, in a morning of May,
That Emelye, who was fairer to be seen 
Than is the lily upon its green stalk,
And fresher than the May with new flowers --
For her hue vied with color of the rose,
I do not know which was the finer of them two --
Before it was day, as was her custom to do,
She was arisen and all ready prepared,
For May will have no laziness at night.
The season urges on every gentle heart,
And makes it out of its sleep to awake suddenly,
And says "Arise, and do thy observance."
This made Emelye remember
To do honor to May, and to rise.
She was gaily clothed, so to say:
Her yellow hair was braided in a tress
Behind her back, a yard long, I guess.
And in the garden, at the rising of the sun,
She walks up and down, and as she pleases
She gathers flowers, mixed white and red,
To make an intricate garland for her head;
And she sang (as) heavenly as an angel.
The great tower, that was so thick and strong,
Which was the main fortification of the castle
(Where the knights were in prison
Of which I told yow and shall tell),
Was just next to the garden wall
Where this Emelye took her pleasure.
The sun was bright and clear that morning,
And Palamon, this woeful prisoner,
As was his custom, by permission of his jailer,
Had risen and roamed in a chamber on high,
In which he saw all the noble city,
And also the garden, full of green branches,
Where this fresh Emelye the bright
Was in her walk, and roamed up and down.
This sorrowful prisoner, this Palamon,
Goes in the chamber roaming to and fro
And to himself lamenting his woe.
That he was born, full often he said, "alas!"
And so it happened, by chance or accident,
That through a window, thickly set with many a bar
Of iron, great and square as any beam,
He cast his eye upon Emelye,
And with that he turned pale and cried, "A!"
As though he were stabbed unto the heart.
And with that cry Arcite immediately leaped up 
And said, "My cousin, what ails thee,
Who art so pale and deadly to look upon?
Why didst thou cry out? Who has done thee offence?
For the love of God, take all in patience
Our imprisonment, for it may not be otherwise.
Fortune has given us this adversity.
Some wicked aspect or disposition
Of Saturn, by some arrangement of the heavenly bodies,
Has given us this, although we had sworn it would not be;
So stood the heavens when we were born.
We must endure it; this is the short and plain."
This Palamon answered and said in reply,
"Cousin, truly, concerning this opinion
Thou hast a foolish conception.
This prison did not cause me to cry out,
But I was hurt right now through my eye
Into my heart, so that it will be the death of me.
The fairness of that lady whom I see
Yonder in the garden roaming to and fro
Is cause of all my crying and my woe.
I know not whether she is woman or goddess,
But truly it is Venus, as I suppose."
And with that he fell down on his knees,
And said, "Venus, if it be thy will
Thus to transfigure yourself in this garden 
Before me, sorrowful, wretched creature,
Help that we may escape out of this prison.
And if it be so that my destiny is shaped
By eternal decree to die in prison,
Have some compassion on our (noble) lineage
Which is brought so low by tyranny."
And with that word Arcite did see
Where this lady roamed to and fro,
And with that sight her beauty hurt him so,
That, if Palamon was sorely wounded,
Arcite is hurt as much as he, or more.
And with a sigh he said piteously,
"The fresh beauty slays me suddenly
Of her who roams in the yonder place;
And unless I have her mercy and her grace,
So that I can at least see her, 
I am as good as dead; there is no more to say."
This Palamon, when he heard those words,
Angrily he looked and answered,
"Sayest thou this in earnest or in play?"
"Nay," said Arcite, "in earnest, by my faith!
So help me God, I have no desire to play."
This Palamon did knit his two brows.
"It would not be," said he, "any great honor to thee 
To be false, nor to be traitor
To me, who am thy cousin and thy brother
Sworn very sincerely, and each of us to the other,
That never, though we had to die by torture,
Until death shall part us two,
Neither of us in love (is) to hinder the other,
Nor in any other case, my dear brother,
But rather thou shouldest truly help me
In every case, as I shall help thee --
This was thy oath, and mine also, certainly;
I know right well, thou darest not deny it.
Thus thou art my trusted confidant, without doubt,
And now thou wouldest falsely be busy preparing 
To love my lady, whom I love and serve,
And ever shall until my heart dies.
Nay, certainly, false Arcite, thou shalt not (do) so.
I loved hire first, and told thee my woe
As to my confidant and my sworn brother 
To further me, as I have told before.
For which thou art bound as a knight
To help me, if it lay in thy power,
Or else thou art false, I dare well say."
This Arcite full proudly spoke in return:
"Thou shalt," said he, "be rather false than I;
And thou art false, I tell thee flatly,
As a mistress I loved her first before thou.
What wilt thou say? Thou knowest not yet now
Whether she is a woman or goddess!
Thine is a feeling of holiness,
And mine is love as to a creature;
For which I told thee my circumstance
As to my cousin and my sworn brother.
I posit (this assumption): that thou lovedest her first;
Knowest thou not well the old clerks' saying,
That `who shall give a lover any law?'
Love is a greater law, by my skull,
Than may be given to any earthly man;
And therefore positive (man-made) law and such decree
Is broken every day for love in every way.
A man must of necessity love, in spite of all he can do;
He can not flee (from) it, though he should be dead,
Whether she be maid, or widow, or else wife.
And also it is not likely all thy life
To stand in her good graces; no more shall I;
For well thou thyself knowest, truly,
That thou and I are condemned to prison
Perpetually; no ransom can help us.
We strive as the hounds did for the bone;
They fought all day, and yet their share was nothing.
There came a kite, while they were so angry,
And carried away the bone between them both.
And therefore, at the king's court, my brother,
Each man for himself, there is no other (way).
Love, if it please thee, for I love and always shall;
And truly, dear brother, this is all.
Here in this prison we must endure,
And each one of us take his chance."
Great and long was the strife between them two,
If I had leisure to tell (it);
But to the point. It happened on a day,
To tell it to you as briefly as I can,
A worthy duke that was called  Perotheus,
Who was  a friend to duke Theseus
Since that same time that they were little children,
Had come to Athens to visit his friend,
And to amuse himself as he was accustomed to do;
For in this world he loved no man so (much),
And he (Theseus) loved him as tenderly in turn.
So well they loved, as old books say,
That when one was dead, truly to tell,
His friend went and sought him down in hell --
But of that story I do not desire to write.
Duke Perotheus loved well Arcite,
And had known him at Thebes year after year,
And finally at request and prayer
Of Perotheus, without any ransom,
Duke Theseus let him out of prison
Freely to go all over, wherever he wishes,
In such a manner as shall I tell you.
This was the agreement, plainly to write,
Between Theseus and this Arcite:
That if it so were that Arcite were found
Ever in his life, by day or night, at any moment
In any country of this Theseus,
And if he were caught, it was agreed thus,
That with a sword he should lose his head.
There was no other remedy nor course of action;
But (he) takes his leave, and homeward he sped.
Let him be ware! His neck lies as a pledge.
How great a sorrow now suffers Arcite!
He feels the death smite through his heart;
He weeps, wails, cries piteously;
To slay himself he secretly awaits (an opportunity).
He said, "Alas that day that I was born!
Now my prison is worse than before;
Now I am destined eternally to dwell
Not in purgatory, but in hell.
Alas, that ever I knew Perotheus!
For else I would have remained with Theseus,
Fettered in his prison evermore.
Then would I have been in bliss and not in woe.
Only the sight of her whom I serve,
Though I never can deserve her grace,
Would have sufficed right enough for me.
O dear cousin Palamon," said he,
"The victory of this adventure is thine.
Very blissfully in prison thou can remain --
In prison? Certainly not, but in paradise!
Well has Fortune turned the dice for thee,
That hast the sight of her, and I the absence.
For it is possible, since thou hast her presence,
And art a knight, a worthy and an able (one),
That by some chance, since Fortune is changeable,
Thou mayest sometime attain thy desire.
But I, who am exiled and barren
Of all grace, and in so great despair
That there is not earth, water, fire, nor air,
Nor creature that is made of them,
That can help me or do comfort (to me) in this,
Well ought I to die in despair and distress.
Farwell my life, my desire, and my gladness!
"Alas, why do folk so commonly complain 
About the providence of God, or of Fortune,
That gives them full often in many a manner
Much better than they can themselves imagine?
One man desires to have riches,
Which is the cause of his murder or great sickness;
And one man would happily (go) out of his prison,
Who is slain in his house by members of his household.
Infinite harms are in this matter.
We know not what thing we pray for here;
We act like one who is drunk as a mouse.
A drunk man knows well he has a house,
But he does not know which is the right way to it,
And to a drunk man the way is slippery.
And certainly, so we fare in this world;
We seek eagerly after felicity,
But we go wrong very often, truly.
Thus can we all say, and especially I,
Who supposed and had a firm belief
That if I might escape from prison,
Then I would have been in joy and perfect well-being,
Whereas now I am exiled from my source of happiness.
Since I can not see you, Emelye,
I am as good as dead; there is not any remedy."
Upon that other side Palamon,
When he knew Arcite was gone,
He makes such sorrow that the great tour
Resounds with his yowling and clamor.
The great fetters themselves on his shins 
Were wet from his bitter, salt tears.
"Alas," said he, "Arcite, cousin mine,
Of all our strife, God knows, the profit is thine.
Thou walkest freely now in Thebes,
And thou care little about my woe.
Thou mayest, since thou hast wisdom and manhood,
Assemble all the folk of our family,
And make a war so sharp on this city
That by some chance or some treaty
Thou mayest have her as lady and as wife
For whom I must of necessity lose my life.
For, as by way of possibility,
Since thou art at thy liberty, free of prison,
And art a lord, thy advantage is great,
More than is mine, who die here in a cage.
For I must weep and wail, while I live,
With all the woe that prison may give me,
And also with pain that love gives me also,
That doubles all my torment and my woe."
With that the fire of jealousy started up
Within his breast, and seized him by the heart
So madly that he was to look upon like 
The box tree or the ash dead and cold.
Then said he, "O cruel gods that govern
This world with binding of your eternal word,
And write in the table of adamant (hardest of stones)
Your decision and your eternal decree,
Why is mankind more obligated unto you 
Than is the sheep that cowers in the sheepfold?
For man is slain exactly like another beast,
And dwells also in prison and detention,
And has sickness and great adversity,
And often times guiltless, indeed.
"What (sort of) governance is in this foreknowledge,
That torments guiltless innocence?
And yet this increases all my suffering,
That man is bound to his duty,
For God's sake, to refrain from his desire,
Whereas a beast may fulfill all his desire.
And when a beast is dead he has no pain;   
But man after his death must weep and lament,
Though in this world he may have (had) care and woe.
Without doubt such is the case.
The answer to this I leave to theologians,
But well I know that great pain is in this world.
Alas, I see a serpent or a thief,
That has done mischief to many a true man,
Go at his liberty, and can go where he pleases.
But I must be in prison because of Saturn,
And also because of Juno, jealous and also mad,
Who has destroyed well nigh all the blood
Of Thebes with its wide devastated walls;
And Venus slays me on that other side
For jealousy and fear of this Arcite."
Now will I cease (speaking of) of Palamon for a little while,
And leave him to dwell in his prison still,
And of Arcite forth I will tell you.
The summer passes, and the long nights 
Increase doubly the strong pains 
Both of the lover and the prisoner.
I know not which has the more woeful task.
For, briefly to say (it), this Palamon
Is damned perpetually to prison,
In chains and in fetters to be dead;
And Arcite is exiled on threat of losing his head
For evermore, out of that country,
Nor nevermore shall see his lady.
Yow lovers now I ask this question:
Who has the worse, Arcite or Palamon?
That one may see his lady every day,
But in prison he must always dwell;
That other where he pleases may ride or walk,
But he shall see his lady nevermore.
Now judge as it pleases you, you who know (of such things),
For I will tell forth as I began.
The Cook of London, while the Reeve spoke,
Was so happy he thought the Reeve scratched him on the back.
"Ha! ha!" said he, "For Christ's passion,
This miller had a sharp conclusion
To his logical argument about lodging!
Well said Salomon in his language,
`Do not bring every man into thy house,'
For providing lodging by night is perilous.
Well ought a man to take heed
Whom he brings into his private home.
I pray to God, give me sorrow and care
If ever, since I was called Roger of Ware,
I heard a miller better set to work (tricked).
He had a malicious trick played on him in the dark.
But God forbid that we stop here;
And therefore, if you agree to hear
A tale by me, who am a poor man,
I will tell you, as well as ever I can,
A little amusing affair that happened in our city."
Our Host answered and said, "I grant it to thee.
Now tell on, Roger; look that it be good,
For of many a pastry hast thou drawn out the gravy,
And many a Jack of Dover (a kind of pie) hast thou sold
That has been twice hot and twice cold.
Of many a pilgrim hast thou Christ's curse,
For of thy parsley yet they fare the worse,
Which they have eaten with thy stubble-fed goose,
For in thy shop is many a fly loose.
Now tell on, gentle Roger by thy name.
But yet I pray thee, be not angry about a joke;
A man may speak very truthfully in joking and play."
"Thou sayest the truth," said Roger, "by my faith!
But `a true jest is a bad jest,' as the Fleming says.
And therefore, Harry Bailly, by thy faith,
Be thou not angry, ere we depart here,
Even though my tale is of an inn-keeper.
But nonetheless I will not tell it yet;
But before we part, indeed, thou shalt be repaid."
And with that he laughed and made good cheer,
And told his tale, as you shall next hear. 
A apprentice once dwelt in our city,
And of a craft of food merchants was he.
Gaily dressed he was as is a goldfinch in the woods,
Brown as a berry, a good-looking short fellow,
With locks black, combed full elegantly.
He could dance so well and jollily
That he was called Perkin Reveler.
He was as full of love and womanizing
As is the hive full of honey sweet;
Happy was the wench who with him might meet.
At every wedding party he would sing and dance;
He loved the tavern better than the shop.
For when there was any procession in Cheapside,
Out of the shop thither would he leap --
Until that he had all the sight seen,
And danced well, he would not come back--
And gathered him a company of his sort
To dance and sing and make such merriment;
And there they agreed on a time to meet,
To play at dice in such and such a street.
For in the town there was no apprentice
That could better throw a pair of dice
Than Perkin could, and thereto he was free
In his spending, in a private place.
That found his master easily in his business accounts,
For many times he found his cash box completely bare.
For surely (in the case of) an revelling apprentice
Who makes a practice of dicing, debauchery, or womanizing,
His master shall pay for it in his shop,
Even though he has no share of the entertainment (for which he pays).
For theft and debauchery, they are interchangeable.
Even though he knows how to play on guitar or fiddle.
Revelling and honesty, in one of low degree,
Are always incompatible, as anyone can see.
This jolly apprentice with his master remained,
Until he was nearly out of his apprenticeship,
Although he was rebuked both early and late,
And sometimes taken (as a prisoner) with music to Newgate prison.
But at the last his master remembered,
Upon a day, when Perkin sought his certificate of release,
A proverb that says this same word:
"Well better is a rotten apple out of the store
Than that it rot al the remnant."
So fares it with a debauched servant;
It is much less harm to let him go away,
Than that he should ruin all the servants in the place.
Therefore his master gave him his certificate,
And ordered him to go, with sorrow and with bad luck!
And thus this jolly apprentice had his leave.
Now let him revel all the night or leave off (do as he chooses).
And because there is no thief without an accomplice,
Who helps him to waste and to consume
That which he can steal or may borrow,
Right away he sent his bed and his clothing
Unto a companion of his own sort,
Who loved dicing, and revelling, and having fun,
And had a wife that kept for the sake of appearances
A shop, and screwed for her living.
When folk had laughed at this foolish business
Of Absolon and clever Nicholas,
Different folk said different opinions,
But for the most part they laughed and enjoyed themselves.
And at this tale I saw no man aggrieved,
Except for only Osewold the Reeve.
Because he was of the carpenter's craft,
A little anger is left in his heart;
He began to grouch, and criticized it a little.
"As I may prosper," said he, "very well could I repay thee
With (a tale of the) blearing of a proud miller's eye (tricking him),
If I wanted to speak of ribaldry.
But I am old; because of age I do not want to play;
Grass time is done; my fodder is now dry straw;
This white head reveals my old years;
My heart is as moldy as my hairs,
Unless I fare as does the fruit of the medlar --
That same fruit continually grows worse,
Until it is rotten in rubbish or in straw.
We old men, I fear, fare like that:
Until we are rotten, we can not be ripe;
We dance always while the world will pipe.
For in our will there sticks ever a nail,
To have a white head and a green tail,
As a leek has; for though our power is gone,
Our will desires folly continually.
For when we can not do anything, then will we talk about it;
Yet in our old ashes fire is raked over (covered).
"Four live coals have we, which I shall describe --
Boasting, lying, anger, greed;
These four little sparks belong to old age.
Our old limbs may well be feeble,
But desire shall not be lacking, that is truth.
And yet I have always a young man's desires,
As many years as have passed hence
Since my tap of life began to run.
For surely, when I was born, immediately
Death turned on the spigot of life and let it flow,
And ever since the tap has so run
Until the barrel is almost all empty.
The stream of life now drops on the rim.
The foolish tongue may well ring and chime
About wretchedness that passed long ago;
With old folk, save dotage, there is no more!"
When our Host had heard this sermon making,
He began to speak as lordly as a king.
He said, "What amounts all this wit?
What! shall we speak all day of holy writ?
The devil made a reeve to preach,
Or of a cobbler made a shipman or a physician.
Say forth thy tale, and do not waste the time.
Lo Deptford, and it is almost seven thirty!
Lo Greenwich, in which is many a rascal!
It is well time to begin thy tale."
"Now, sires," said this Osewold the Reeve,
"I pray yow all that you not be displeased,
Though I answer (him), and somewhat make a fool of him; 
For it is permissable to repel force with force.
"This drunk Miller has told us here
How a carpenter was tricked,
Perhaps in scorn, for I am one.
And, by your leave, I shall repay him right now;
Right in his churl's terms will I speak.
I pray to God his neck may break into pieces;
He can well in my eye see a piece of straw,
But in his own he can not see a large piece of timber."
At Trumpington, not far from Cambridge,
There goes a brook, and over that a bridge,
Upon the which brook there stands a mill;
And this is absolute truth that I tell you:
A miller was there dwelling many a day.
As any peacock he was proud and gay.
He could play the bagpipe and fish, and mend nets,
And play a drinking game, and well wrestle and shoot;
Always by his belt he carried a long cutlass,
And very sharp was the blade of the sword.
An elegant dagger he carried in his pouch;
There was no man, for peril, dared touch him.
A Sheffield knife he carried in his hose.
Round was his face, and he had a pug nose;
As bald as an ape was his skull.
He was a quarrelsome bully in every way.
There dared no person lay hand upon him,
That he did not swear he should pay for it right away.
A thief he was, in truth, of grain and meal,
And that a sly one, and accustomed to steal.
His name was called haughty Symkyn.
A wife he had, come of noble kin;
The parson of the town was her father.
With her he gave very many a pan of brass,
So that Symkyn should be allied with his family.
She was fostered in a nunnery;
For Symkyn would have no wife, as he said,
Unless she were well educated and a virgin,
To preserve his state of yeomanry.
And she was proud, and brazen as is a magpie.
A very fair sight was it to look upon those two;
On holidays before her would he go
With the tip of his hood wound about his head,
And she came after in a gown of red;
And Symkyn had hose of the same color.
There dared no one call her anything but "lady";
There was no one so brave that went by the way
That dared flirt with her or once play,
Unless he wished to be slain by Symkyn
With cutlass, or with knife, or dagger.
For jealous folk are dangerous always --
At least they would like their wives to think so.
And also, because she was a bit besmirched (by her illegitimacy),
She was as haughty as water in a ditch,
And full of disdain and of scorn.
She thought that a lady should be aloof,
Considering her family and her education
Which she had learned in the nunnery.
A daughter had they between them two
Of twenty years of age, without any more,
Except for a child that was a half year of age;
In cradle it lay and was a good looking little boy.
This wench was thick and well grown,
With pug nose and eyes gray as glass,
With buttocks broad and breasts round and high.
But right fair was her hair; I will not lie.
This parson of the town, because she was fair,
Was determined to make her his heir,
Both of his property and his household,
And he raised difficulties about her marriage.
His purpose was to bestow her high
Into some worthy family of noble ancestry;
For holy church's goods must be dispensed
To holy church's blood, which is descended from the church.
Therefore he would his holy blood honor,
Though he holy church should devour.
A profitable monopoly on milling has this miller, out of doubt,
With wheat and malt of all the land about;
And namely there was an important college
People call the Soler Hall at Cambridge;
There their wheat and also their malt was ground.
And on one day it happened, at a time,
The manciple lay sick with a malady;
People thought indeed that he should die.
For which this miller stole both meal and grain
A hundred times more than before;
For before this he stole but courteously,
But now he was a thief excessively,
For which the warden (of the college) complained and made a fuss.
But the miller thought that not worth a weed;
He blustered fiercely, and swore it was not so.
Then were there two young poor scholars,
Who dwelt in this hall, of which I tell.
Headstrong they were, and eager for sport,
And, only for their mirth and amusement,
Upon the warden busily they implore
To give them leave, for but a little while,
To go to the mill and see their grain ground;
And boldly they dared pledge their necks
The miller should not steal from them half a peck
Of grain by trickery, nor rob them by force;
And at the last the warden gave hem leave.
John was called that one, and Aleyn was called that other;
Of one town were they born, that was called Strother,
Far in the north; I can not tell where.
This Aleyn makes ready all his gear,
And on a horse the sack he cast immediately.
Forth goes Aleyn the clerk, and also John,
With good sword and with buckler by their sides.
John knew the way -- they needed no guide --
And at the mill he lays the sack down.
Aleyn spoke first: "All hail, Symond, in faith!
How fares thy faire daughter and thy wife?"
"Aleyn, welcome," said Symkyn, "by my life!
And John also, how now, what do you here?"
"Symond," said John, "by God, need knows no law.
He who has no servant must serve himself,
Or else he is a fool, as clerks say.
Our manciple, I expect he will be dead,
So continually ache the teeth in his head;
And therefore I am come, and also Alayn,
To grind our grain and carry it home again;
I pray you speed us hence as fast as you can."
"It shall be done," said Symkyn, "by my faith!
What will you do while it is being done?"
"By God, right by the hopper will I stand,"
Said John, "and see how the grain goes in.
Yet saw I never, by my father's kin,
How the hopper wags to and fro."
Aleyn answered, "John, and wilt thou do so?
Then will I be beneath, by my head,
And see how the meal falls down
Into the trough; that shall be my sport.
For John, in faith, I may be like you;
I am as poor a miller as you are."
This miller smiled at their foolishness,
And thought, "All this is done only for a trick.
They think that no man can trick them,
But by my welfare, yet shall I blear their eyes (fool them),
Despite all the trickery in their philosophy.
The more ingenious tricks that they make,
The more will I steal when I take.
Instead of flour yet will I give them bran.
`The greatest clerks are not the wisest men,'
As once to the wolf thus spoke the mare.
All their learning I reckon not worth a weed."
Out at the door he goes full stealthily,
When he saw his time, quietly.
He looks up and down until he has found
The clerks' horse, where it stood tied
Behind the mill, under an arbor;
And to the horse he goes gently; 
He strips off the bridle right away.
And when the horse was loose, he begins to go
Toward the fen, where wild mares run,
And forth with "wehee," through thick and through thin.
This miller goes back to the mill, no word he said,
But does his work, and with the clerks amused himself
Until their grain was completely ground.
And when the meal is sacked and tied,
This John goes out and finds his horse gone away,
And began to cry "Help!" and "Wellaway!
Our horse is lost, Alayn, for God's bones,
Step on thy feet! Come on, man, quickly!
Alas, our warden has lost his saddle horse."
This Aleyn forgot everything, both meal and grain;
All his skillful management was out of his mind.
"What, which way is he gone?" he began to cry.
The wife cam leaping inward at a run.
She said, "Alas! your horse goes to the fen
With wild mares, as fast as he can go.
Curses come on his hand that tied him so carelessly,
And he that should have tied the rein better!"
"Alas," said John, "Aleyn, for Christ's pain
Lay down thy sword, and I will mine also.
I am full strong (swift), God knows, as is a roe deer;
By God's heart, he shall not escape us both!
Why did thou not put the horse in the barn?
Bad luck! By God, Alayn, thou art a fool!"
These hapless clerks have run very fast 
Toward the fen, both Aleyn and also John.
And when the miller saw that they were gone,
He half a bushel of their flour has taken,
And ordered his wife to go knead it in a cake.
He said, "I suppose the clerks were leery (of what I might do).
Yet can a miller make a clerk's beard (trick a clerk),
Despite all his learning; now let them go their way!
Lo, there he goes! Yes, let the children play.
They will not catch him easily, by my crown."
These hapless clerks run up and down
With "Stop! Stop! Stand! Stand! Down there, watch out behind,
Go whistle thou, and I shall catch him here!"
But shortly, until that it was truly night,
They could not, though they did al their might,
Catch their horse, he ran always so fast,
Until in a ditch they caught him at the last.
Weary and wet, as a beast is in the rain,
Comes hapless John, and with him comes Aleyn.
"Alas," said John, "the day that I was born!
Now are we driven to contempt and to scorn.
Our grain is stolen; men will call us fools,
Both the warden and all our fellows,
And namely the miller, wellaway!"
Thus laments John as he goes by the way
Toward the mill, and the horse Bayard in his hand.
The miller sitting by the fire he found,
For it was night, and further they could not go;
But for the love of God they ask him  
For lodging and for refreshment, for their cash.
The miller said in reply, "If there be any,
Such as it is, yet shall you have your share.
My house is small, but you have learned the art of logic;
You know how by logical arguments to make a place
A mile broad out of twenty feet of space.
Let's see now if this place may suffice,
Or make it large by speech, as is your custom."
"Now, Symond," said John, "by Saint Cuthbert,
Thou art always joking, and this is nicely answered.
I have heard said, `Man shall take one of two things:
Such as he finds, or take such as he brings.'
But specially I pray thee, host dear,
Get us some food and drink, and make us good cheer,
And we will pay truly at the full.
With empty hand men may lure no hawks;
Lo, here is our silver, ready to spend."
This miller into town his daughter sent
For ale and bread, and roasted them a goose,
And tied up their horse, it should no more go loose,
And in his own bedroom made them a bed,
With sheets and with blankets nicely spread
Not ten feet or twelve from his own bed.
His daughter had a bed, all by herself,
Right in the same chamber side by side.
It could be no better, and (do you know) the cause why?
There was no larger lodging in the place.
They sup and they converse, to entertain themselves,
And drink ever strong ale of the best quality.
About midnight they went to bed.
Well has this miller varnished his head (drank heavily);
Full pale he was for drunkenness, and not red.
He belches, and he speaks through the nose
As if he had hoarseness, or had a cold.
To bed he goes, and with him goes his wife.
She was as cheerful and jolly as any jay,
So was her jolly whistle well wetted.
The cradle at her bed's feet is set,
To rock, and to give the child to suck.
And when all that was in the crock was drunk,
To bed went the daughter right away;
To bed goes Aleyn and also John;
There was no more -- they needed no sleeping potion.
This miller has imbibed so much ale
That he snorts like a horse in his sleep,
And of his tail behind he took no heed.
His wife bore him a bass accompaniment, very loud;
One could hear their snoring two furlongs away;
The wench snores also, to keep them company.
Aleyn the clerk, who heard this melody,
He poked John, and said, "Sleepest thou?
Heardest thou ever such a song before now?
Lo, such a compline (evening service) is made by them all;
May a wild fire upon their bodies fall!
Who heard ever such an amazing thing?
Yes, they shall have the best (i.e., the worst) of a bad ending.
This long night there comes to me no sleep;
But yet, no matter, all shall be for the best.
For, John," said he, "as ever I may thrive,
If I can, yon wench will I screw.
Some redress the law has shaped for us,
For, John, there is a law that says thus:
That if a man in one point is injured,
That in another he shall be relieved.
Our grain is stolen, truly, it can not be denied,
And we have had a hard time all this day;
And since I shall have no recompense
For my loss, I will have satisfaction.
By God's soul, it shall be no other way!"
This John answered, "Alayn, be careful!
The miller is a perilous man," he said,
"And if he out of his sleep suddenly awoke,
He might do injury to us both."
Aleyn answered, "I reckon him not worth a fly."
And up he rises, and by the wench he crept.
This wench lay on her back and fast slept,
Until he was so near, before she could see him,
It was too late to cry out,
And shortly to speak, they were together. 
Now play, Aleyn, for I will speak of John.
This John lies still five minutes or so,
And to himself he laments and feels sorry.
"Alas!" said he, "this is a wicked trick;
Now may I say that I am nothing but a fool.
Yet has my fellow something for his harm;
He has the miller's daughter in his arm.
He took a risk, and has accomplished his purpose,
And I lie like a sack of rubbish in my bed;
And when this trick is told another day,
I shall be considered a fool, a weakling!
I will arise and chance it, by my faith!
`The timid one is unlucky,' thus people say."
And up he rose, and quietly he went
To the cradle, and in his hand seized it,
And carried it quietly to the foot of his bed.
Soon after this the wife stopped her snoring,
And awoke, and went out to piss,
And came back, and began to miss her cradle,
And groped here and there, but she found none.
"Alas!" said she, "I had almost gone wrong;
I had almost gone to the clerks' bed.
Ay, bless me! Then I would have made a mess of it!"
And forth she goes until she found the cradle.
She gropes always further with her hand,
And found the bed, and thought all was well,
Because the cradle by it stood,
And did not know where she was, for it was dark;
But gently she crept in to the clerk,
And lies full still, and would have gone to sleep.
Within a moment this John the clerk leaped up,
And on this good wife he lays on vigorously.
She had not had so merry an experience for a long time;
He stabs hard and deep as if he were mad.
This jolly life have these two clerks led
Until the third cock began to sing (an hour before dawn).
Aleyn grew weary at the time of dawn,
For he had labored all the long night,
And said, "Farewell, Malyne, sweet creature!
The day is come; I may no longer remain here;
But evermore, wherever I walk or ride,
I am thine own clerk, as I may prosper!"
"Now, dear sweetheart," said she, "go, farewell!
But before thou go, one thing I will tell thee:
When thou go homeward by the mill,
Right at the entry behind the door 
Thou shalt find a cake of half a bushel
That was made of thine own meal,
Which I helped my father to steal.
And, good sweetheart, God save and keep thee!"
And with that word she almost began to weep.
Aleyn up rises, and thought, "Before it dawns,
I will go creep in by my fellow,"
And found the cradle with his hand right away.
"By God," thought he, "I have gone all wrong.
My head is dizzy from my work to-night,
That makes me go not right.
I know well by the cradle I have gone wrong;
Here lies the miller and his wife also."
And forth he goes, in the name of twenty devils,
Unto the bed where the miller lay.
He expected to have crept in by his fellow John,
And in by the miller he crept right then,
And caught him by the neck, and quietly he spoke.
He said, "Thou John, thou pig's-head, awake,
For Christ's soul, and hear a real joke.
For by that lord that is called Saint James,
I have three times in this short night
Screwed the miller's daughter flat on her back,
While thou hast, like a coward, been terrified."
"Yes, false scoundrel," said the miller, "hast (thou done so)?
Ah, false traitor! False clerk!" said he,
"Thou shalt be dead, by God's worthiness!
Who dared be so bold to degrade
My daughter, who is come from such noble lineage?"
And by the Adam's apple he caught Alayn,
And he seized him angrily in turn,
And on the nose he smote him with his fist.
Down ran the bloody stream upon his breast;
And on the floor, with nose and mouth badly broken,
They wallow as do two pigs in a bag;
And up they go, and down again straightway,
Until the miller stumbled on a stone,
And down he fell backward upon his wife,
Who knew nothing of this foolish strife;
For she was fallen asleep a little bit
With John the clerk, who had been awake all night,
And with the fall out of her sleep she started up.
"Help! holy cross of Bromeholm," she said,
"In your hands! Lord, to Thee I call!
Awake, Symond! The fiend has fallen on me.
My heart is broken; help! I am as good as dead!
There lies one upon my belly and one on my head.
Help, Symkyn, for the false clerks fight!"
This John started up as fast as ever he could,
And grasps by the walls to and fro,
To find a staff; and she leaped up also,
And knew the interior of the house better than did this John,
And by the wall a staff she found right away,
And saw a little glimmering of a light,
For at a hole in shone the moon bright,
And by that light she saw both the two of them,
But surely she did not know who was who,
But she saw a white thing in her eye.
And when she did espy this white thing,
She thought the clerk had worn a night cap,
And with the staff she drew ever nearer and nearer,
And intended to have hit this Aleyn squarely,
And smote the miller on the bald skull,
So that down he goes, and cried, "Help! I die!"
These clerks beat him well and let him lie,
And dress themselves, and took their horse straightway,
And also their meal, and on their way they go.
And at the mill yet they took their cake
Of half a bushel flour, very well baked.
Thus is the proud miller well beaten,
And has lost the charge for grinding of the wheat,
And paid for the supper every bit
Of Aleyn and of John, who beat him well.
His wife is screwed, and his daughter also.
Lo, this is how it is when a miller is false!
And therefore this proverb is said very truly,
"One who does evil should not expect good."
A trickster shall himself be tricked.
And God, that sits high in majesty,
Save al this company, high ranking and low (every one)!
Thus have I repaid the Miller in my tale.
