When all this miracle was told, every man
Was so sober that it was wonderful to see,
Until our Host then began to joke 
And then for the first time he looked at me,
And said thus: "What sort of man art thou?" said he;
"Thou lookest as if thou would track a hare,
For ever upon the ground I see thee stare.
" Approach nearer, and look up merrily.
Now make way, sirs, and let this man have room!
He in the waist is shaped as well as I;
This would be a little doll in an arm to embrace
For any woman, small and fair of face.
He seems otherworldly in his behavior,
For unto no person is he sociable:
"Say something now, since other folk have spoken;
Tell us a tale of mirth, and that right now."
"Host," said I, "be not displeased,
For certainly I know no other tale,
Except for a riming romance I learned long ago."
"Yes, that is good," said he; "now we shall hear
Some dainty thing, it seems to me from his appearance."
Listen, my lords, with good will,
And I will tell truly 
Of mirth and of pleasure,
All about a knight who was fair and gentle
In battle and in tournament; 
His name was sir Thopas.
He was born in a distant land,
In Flanders, far beyond the sea,
At Popering, in that place.
His father was a very noble man,
And he was lord of that country,
Since it was God's will.
Sir Thopas grew up to be a doughty lad; 
White was his face as fine white bread,
His lips red as a rose; 
His complexion is like scarlet deeply dyed,
And I tell you in true certainty
He had a seemly nose.
His hair, his beard was like saffron,
That to his girdle reached down; 
His shoes of Cordovan leather.
Of Bruges were his brown stockings,
His robe was of silk woven with gold,
That cost many a half-penny.
He knew how to hunt for wild animals,
And ride a-hawking for water-fowl
With grey gos-hawk on hand; 
Moreover he was a good archer; 
In wrestling there was no one his peer,
Where any ram shall stand (as a prize).
Very many a maid, bright in bed-chamber,
They mourn for him passionately,
When it would be better for them to sleep; 
But he was chaste and no lecher,
And sweet as is the dog rose
That bears the red hip.
And it so happened upon a day,
In truth, as I can tell you,
Sir Thopas wanted to ride out.
He mounted upon his gray steed,
And in his hand a light lance,
A long sword by his side.
He spurs through a fair forest,
In which is many a wild best,
Yea, both buck and hare; 
And as he spurs north and east,
I tell it you, to him had almost
Happened a grievous misfortune.
There spring herbs large and small,
The licorice and the zedoary,
And many a clove-gillyflower;  
And nutmeg to put in ale,
Whether it be new or old,
Or to lay in a clothes press.
The birds sing, it can not be denied,
The sparrow hawk and the parrot,
That it was joy to hear; 
The male thrush made also her lay,
The wood-pigeon upon the branch
She sang very loud and clear.
Sir Thopas fell in a yearning for love,
As soon as he heard the thrush sing,
And spurred as if he were crazy.
His fair steed in his spurring
So sweated that one could wring him; 
His sides were all blood.
Sir Thopas also so weary was
For spurring on the soft grass,
So fierce was his heart,
That down he laid him in that place
To give his steed some rest,
And gave him good dry fodder.
"O Saint Mary, bless me!
What does this love have against me
To bind me so painfully?
I dreamed all this night, by God,
An elf-queen shall be my sweetheart
And sleep under my cloak.
"An elf-queen will I love, indeed,
For in this world no woman is
Worthy to be my mate
In town; 
All other women I forsake,
And to an elf-queen I betake nyself,
By dale and also by hill!"
Into his saddle he climbed at once,
And spurs over stile and stone
An elf-queen for to see,
Until he so long had ridden and walked
That he found, in a secret place,
The country of Fairy
So wild; 
For in that country there was no one
Who dared ride or go on foot at him,
Neither woman nor child; 
Until there came a big giant,
His name was sir Olifaunt,
A perilous man of deeds.
He said, "Child, by Termagaunt,
Unless thou spur out of my territory,
At once I will slay thy steed
With mace.
Here is the queen of Fairyland,
With harp and pipe and hurdy-gurdy,
Dwelling in this place."
The child said, "As I may prosper,
Tomorrow will I meet with thee,
When I have my armor; 
And yet I trust, by my faith,
That thou shalt by means of this light lance  
Very bitterly pay for it.
Thy maw
Shall I pierce, if I can,
Ere it be fully prime of day (9 a.m.),
For here thou shalt be slain."
Sir Thopas drew back very fast; 
This giant threw stones at him 
Out of a terrible staff-sling.
But child Thopas safely escapes,
And it was all due to God's grace,
And due to his fair bearing.
Yet listen, gentlemen, to my tale
Merrier than the nightingale,
For now I will you tell
How sir Thopas, with slender waist,
Spurring over hill and dale,
Is come again to town.
His merry men commanded he
To make him both amusement and delight,
For by necessity he must fight
With a giant with three heads,
For love and pleasure
Of one who shone very bright.
"Do come," he said, "my musicians,
And story tellers to tell tales,
Right now in my arming,
Of romances that are royal,
Of popes and of cardinals,
And also of the joys of love."
They fetched him first the sweet wine,
And mead also in a maple drinking bowl,
And royal delicacies
Of gingerbread that was very fine,
And licorice, and also cumin,
With sugar that is excellent.
He put on next to his white flesh
Of linen cloth fine and clear,
A pair of trousers and also a shirt; 
And next to his shirt a quilted jacket,
And over that a chain-mail shirt 
To prevent piercing of his heart; 
And over that a fine plate armor,
Which was all wrought with jewelers' work,
Very strong it was of iron plate; 
And over that his surcoat
As white as is a lily flour,
In which he will dispute.
His shield was all of gold so red,
And on that was a boar's head,
Beside a carbuncle (red gem); 
And there he swore on ale and bread
How the giant shall be dead,
Whatever may happen!
His leg guards were of hardened leather,
His sword's sheath of ivory,
His helm of bright brass; 
His saddle was of ivory,
His bridle shone like the sun,
Or like the moon light.
His spear was of fine cypress,
That foretells war, and nothing of peace,
The head ground very sharp; 
His steed was all dapple gray,
It goes at a slow walk on the way
Very softly and easily
In land.
Lo, my lords, here is a fit!
If you want to hear any more of it,
To tell it will I try
Now hold your mouth, for kindness, please,
Both knight and noble lady,
And hearken to my tale; 
Of battle and of chivalry,
And of ladies' passionate love
Right now I will you tell.
Men speak of excellent romances,
Of Horn child and of Ypotys,
Of Bevis of Hampton and sir Guy of Watwick,
Of sir Lybeux Desconus and Pleyndamour --
But sir Thopas, he bears the flower
Of royal chivalry!
His good steed he mounted
And forth upon his way he glided
Like a spark out of the burning log; 
Upon his top of his helmet he bore a tower,
And in that stuck a lily flower --
God protect his body from shame!
And because he was a knight errent,
He would not sleep in any house,
But lie in his hood; 
His bright helm was his pillow,
And by him his war-horse grazes
On herbs fine and good.
He himself drank water of the well,
As did the knight sir Perceval
So worthy in his armor,
Until on a day --
"No more of this, for God's dignity,"
Said our Host, "for thou makest me
So weary of thy true ignorance
That, as surely as God may bless my soul,
My ears ache from thy crappy speech.
Now such a rime I commit to the devil!
This may well be doggerel verse," said he.
"Why so?" said I, "why wilt thou prevent me
From telling more of my tale than another man,
Since it is the best rime I know?"
"By God," said he, "for plainly, at one word,
Thy crappy riming is not worth a turd!
Thou dost nothing else but waste time.
Sir, at one word, thou shalt no longer rime.
Let's see whether thou can tell anything in alliterative verse,
Or tell something in prose, at the least,
In which there may be some mirth or some doctrine."
"Gladly," said I, "by God's sweet pain!
I will you tell a little thing in prose
That ought to please you, as I suppose,
Or else, certainly, you are too hard to please.
It is a virtuous moral tale,
Although it is told sometimes in various ways
By various folk, as I shall tell you.
"As thus: you know that every Evangelist
Who tells us of the pain of Jesus Christ
Does not say everything as his fellow does; 
But nonetheless their essential meaning is all true,
And all agree in their meaning,
Although there may be a difference in their telling.
For some of them say more, and some say less,
When they His piteous passion express --
I mean of Mark, Matthew, Luke, and John --
But doubtless their essential meaning is all the same.
Therefore, gentlemen, I beseech you,
If you think I vary as in my speech,
As thus, though I tell something more
Of proverbs than you have heard before
Comprehended in this little treatise here,
With which to strengthen the effect of my matter; 
And though I do not say the same words
As you have heard, yet to you all I pray
Blame not me; for, in my essential meaning,
You shall nowhere find difference
From the meaning of that little treatise 
In imitation of which this merry tale I write.
And therefore hearken what I shall say,
And let me tell all my tale, I pray."
"Weeping and wailing, grief and other sorrow
I know enough, on evenings and mornings,"
Said the Merchant, "and so do many others 
Who are wedded. I believe that it is so,
For well I know it fares so with me.
I have a wife, the worst that can be;
For though the fiend were married to her,
She would outmatch him, I dare well swear.
Why should I tell you in detail
Her high malice? She is a shrew in every way.
There is a long and large difference
Between Griselda's great patience
And the extreme cruelty of my wife 
Were I released (from marriage), so may I may prosper,
I would never again come in the snare.
We wedded men live in sorrow and care.
Try it whoso will, and he shall find
That I say truth, by Saint Thomas of India,
As for the greater part (majority) -- I say not all.
God prevent that it should so happen!
"A, good sir Host, I have been wedded 
These two months, and no more, by God;
And yet, I believe, he who all his life
Wifeless has been, though one would him stab
Unto the heart, could not in any way
Tell so much sorrow as I now here
Could tell of my wife's cursedness!"
"Now," said our Host, "Merchant, as God may you bless,
Since you know so much of that art
Full heartily I pray you tell us part."
"Gladly," said he, "but of my own sorrow,
For sorry heart, I can tell no more."
Once there was dwelling in Lombardy
A worthy knight, who was born in Pavia,
In which he lived in great prosperity;
And sixty years a wifeless man was he,
And followed always his bodily desire
On women, where was his appetite,
As do these fools that are secular.
And when he was passed sixty years,
Were it for holiness or for dotage
I can not say, but such a great desire
Had this knight to be a wedded man
That day and night he does all he can
To discover where he might wedded be,
Praying our Lord to grant him that he
Might once know of that blissful life
That is between a husband and his wife,
And to live under that holy bond
With which God first bound man and woman.
"No other life," said he, "is worth a bean,
For wedlock is so easy and so pure,
That in this world it is a paradise."
Thus said this old knight, who was so wise.
And certainly, as truly as God is king,
To take a wife it is a glorious thing,
And especially when a man is old and white-haired;
Then is a wife the best part of his treasure.
Then should he take a young wife and a fair,
On which he might engender himself an heir,
And lead his life in joy and in pleasure,
Whereas these bachelors sing "alas,"
When they find any adversity
In love, which is nothing but childish vanity.
And truly it is fitting to be thus,
That bachelors have often pain and woe;
On brittle ground they build, and insecurity
They find when they expect security.
They live but as a bird or as a beast,
In liberty and under no restraint,
Whereas a wedded man in his estate
Lives a blissful and orderly life 
Bound under this yoke of marriage.
Well may his heart in joy and bliss abound,
For who can be so obedient as a wife?
Who is so true, and also so eager 
To care for him, sick and well, as is his mate?
For happiness or woe she will not forsake him;
She is not weary of loving and serving him,
Though he lie bedridden until he dies.
And yet some clerks say it is not so,
Of which that Theofrastus is one of those.
What does it matter though Theofrastus wants to lie?
"Take no wife," said he, "for managing the household,
As to economize in thy household expenditures.
A true servant does more diligence
To guard thy goods than thine own wife,
For she will claim half part all her life.
And if thou be sick, as God may save me,
Thy real friends, or a true servant,
Will take care of thee better than she that waits always
To inherit thy goods and has done so many a day.
And if thou take a wife unto thy household
Full easily canst thou be a cuckold."
This opinion, and a hundred things worse,
Writes this man, may God his bones curse!
But take no heed of all such foolishness;
Defy Theofrastus, and listen to me.
A wife is God's gift truly;
All other sorts of gifts certainly,
Such as lands, rents, pasture, or right to use common land,
Or personal possessions -- all are gifts of Fortune
That pass like a shadow upon a wall.
But doubt not, if I shall speak plainly:
A wife will last, and in thy house endure,
Well longer than thou will wish, indeed.
Marriage is a full great sacrament.
He who has no wife, I consider him ruined;
He lives helpless and all desolate --
I speak of folk in secular life.
And hearken why -- I say not this for nothing --
That woman is created for man's help.
The high God, when he had made Adam,
And saw him all alone, stark naked,
God of his great goodness said then,
"Let us now make a helper for this man
Like to himself"; and then he made him Eve.
Here can you see, and hereby can you prove,
That wife is man's help and his comfort,
His earthly paradise, and his source of consolation.
So obedient and so virtuous is she,
They must necessarily live in unity.
One flesh they are, and one flesh, as I guess,
Has but one heart, in prosperity and in distress.
A wife! A, Saint Mary, bless me!
How could a man have any adversity
That has a wife? Certainly, I can not say.
The bliss that is betwixt them two
There can no tongue tell, nor heart think.
If he be poor, she helps him to work;
She keeps his goods, and wastes not a bit;
All that her husband desires, well pleases her;
She says not once "nay," when he says "yea."
"Do this," says he; "All ready, sir," says she.
O blissful order of wedlock precious,
Thou art so merry, and also so virtuous,
And so commended and approved also
That every man that considers himself worth a leek
Upon his bare knees ought all his life
To thank his God that has sent him a wife,
Or else pray to God to send him 
A wife to last unto his life's end.
For then his life is set in security;
He may not be deceived, as I guess,
Providing that he work according to his wife's advice.
Then may he boldly bear up his head,
They are so true and therewithal so wise;
For which, if thou will act like a wise man,
Do always as women will advise thee.
Lo, how Jacob, as these clerks tell,
By good counsel of his mother Rebecca,
Bound the kid's skin about his neck,
For which his father's blessing he won.
Lo Judith, as the story also can tell,
By wise counsel she God's people kept,
And slew that Holofernes, while he slept.
Lo Abigail, by good counsel how she
Saved her husband Nabal when he
Should have been slain; and look, Esther also
By good counsel delivered out of woe
The people of God, and made that same Mordecai
To be exalted by Ahasuerus.
There is no thing superior (in degree of virtue),
As says Seneca, above a humble wife.
Submit to thy wife's tongue, as Cato bids;
She shall command, and thou shalt submit to it,
And yet she will (seem to) obey by way of courtesy.
A wife is keeper of thy household;
Well may the sick man bewail and weep,
Where there is no wife to keep the house.
I warn thee, if wisely thou wilt act,
Love well thy wife, as Christ loved his church.
If thou lovest thyself, thou lovest thy wife;
No man hates his flesh, but in his life
He nurtures it, and therefore I bid thee
Cherish thy wife, or thou shalt never prosper.
Husband and wife, however much men may jest or play,
Of worldly folk hold the secure way;
They are so knit together no harm can there befall,
And especially upon the wife's side.
For which this January, of whom I told,
Considered has, in his old age,
The pleasing life, the virtuous quiet,
That is in honey-sweet marriage,
And for his friends on a day he sent,
To tell them the substance of his intention.
With serious face his tale he has them told.
He said, "Friends, I am white-haired and old,
And almost, God knows, on my grave's brink;
Upon my soul somewhat must I think.
I have my body foolishly wasted;
Blessed be God that it shall be amended!
For I will be, certainly, a wedded man,
And that at once in all the haste I can (do it).
Unto some maid fair and tender of age,
I pray yow, prepare for my marriage
Right away, for I will not delay;
And I will attempt to discover, on my side,
To whom I may be wedded hastily.
But forasmuch as you are more than I,
You shall rather such a thing discover
Than I, and where it would be best to ally myself (marry).
"But one thing warn I you, my friends dear,
I will no old wife have in any way.
She shall not pass twenty years, certainly;
Old fish and young flesh would I gladly have.
Better is," said he, "a pike than a pickerel (young pike),
And better than old beef is the tender veal.
I want no woman thirty years of age;
It is but dry bean-stalks and coarse fodder.
And also these old widows, God it knows,
They know so much trickery on Wade's boat,
Do so much harm, when they please,
That with them should I never live in rest.
For various schools make clever clerks;
A woman of many schools is half a clerk.
But certainly, one can guide a young thing,
Just as one can mold warm wax with hands.
Therefore I tell you plainly, in brief,
I will no old wife have at all for this reason.
For if it so were that I had such bad luck
That I in her could have no pleasure,
Then I should lead my life in adultery
And go straight to the devil when I die.
Nor any children should I upon her beget;
Yet I would rather hounds had eaten me 
Than that my heritage should fall
In a stranger's hand, and this I tell you all.
I am not in my dotage; I know the cause why
One should wed, and furthermore know I
There speaks many a man of marriage
Who knows no more of it than my servant boy knows 
For which causes man should take a wife.
If he can not live his life chastely,
Let him take him a wife with great devotion,
For the sake of lawful procreation
Of children to the honor of God above,
And not only for sexual passion or love;
And so that they should abstain from lechery,
And yield their marital debt when it is due;
Or so that each of them should help the other
In distress, as a sister shall the brother,
And live in celibacy full piously.
But sirs, by your leave, that am not I.
For -- God be thanked! -- I dare make boast
I feel my limbs strong and sufficient
To do all that is proper to a man;
I know myself best what I can do.
Though I be white-haired, I fare as does a tree
That blossoms before the fruit is grown;
And a blossom-filled tree is neither dry nor dead.
I feel me nowhere white-haired but on my head;
My heart and all my limbs are as green
As laurel through the year is to be seen.
And since you have heard all my intention,
I pray you to my will you will assent."
Diverse men diversely him told
Of marriage many old examples.
Somme blamed it, some praised it, certainly,
But at the last, shortly to say,
As every day altercation occurs
Between friends in disputation,
There befell a strife betwixt his two brothers,
Of whom that one was called Placebo;
Justinus truly was called that other.
Placebo said, "O January, brother,
Full little need had you, my lord so dear,
To ask counsel of any that is here,
Except that you are so full of wisdom
That it does not please you, for your high prudence,
To deviate from the word of Solomon.
This word said he unto us every one:
`Do everything according to good advice,' thus said he,
`And then shalt thou not repent.'
But though Solomon spoke such a word,
My own dear brother and my lord,
As surely as God my soul may bring to rest,
I hold your own counsel is the best.
For, brother mine, of me take this advice:
I have now been a courtier all my life,
And God it knows, though I am unworthy,
I have stood in very high degree
Among lords of very high rank;
Yet had I never with any of them disagreement.
I never contradicted them, truly;
I know well that my lord knows more than I.
What he says, I consider it unshakably true;
I say the same, or else something similar.
A full great fool is any counselor
That serves any lord of high honor,
That dares presume, or else think it,
That his counsel should surpass his lord's judgment.
Nay, lords are no fools, by my faith!
You have yourselves showed here to-day
Such high good judgment, so piously and well,
That I consent and confirm every bit
All your words and your opinion.
By God, there is no man in all this town,
Nor in Italy, that could have spoken better!
Christ considers himself by this counsel very well pleased.
And truly, it is a bold act
By any man that is advanced in age
To take a young wife; by my father's kin,
Your heart hangs on a jolly pin (is very merry)!
Do now in this matter exactly as you please,
For finally I consider it for the best."
Justinus, that always still sat and listened,
Right in this manner he to Placebo answered:
"Now, brother mine, be patient, I pray,
Since you have spoken, and hear what I say.
Seneca, amongst other words wise,
Says that a man ought very carefully consider
To whom he gives his land or his moveable possessions.
And since I ought to consider very carefully
To whom I give my goods away from me,
Well much more I ought to consider
To whom I give my body for always.
I warn you well, it is no child's play
To take a wife without deliberation.
One must inquire -- this is my opinion --
Whether she be wise, or sober, or given to drink,
Or proud, or else otherwise a shrew,
A scold, or waster of thy goods,
Or rich, or poor, or else man-crazy.
Although it is so that no man shall find 
Any in this world that is perfect in everything,
No man, nor beast, such as men could imagine;
But nevertheless it ought enough suffice
With any wife, (to learn) if it so were that she had
More good personal qualities than her bad vices;
And all this requires leisure to find out.
For, God it knows, I have wept many a tear
Full privately, since I have had a wife.
Praise whosoever will a wedded man's life,
Certainly I find in it nothing but cost and care
And duties, of all blisses bare.
And yet, God knows, my neighbors about,
And especially many a crowd of women,
Say that I have the most steadfast wife,
And also the meekest one that bears life;
But I know best where my shoe pinches me.
You may, for me, do just as you like;
Consider -- you are a man of advanced age --
How that you enter into marriage,
And especially with a young wife and a fair.
By him that made water, earth, and air,
The youngest man that is in all this company
Is busy enough to bring it about
To have his wife alone. Trust me,
You shall not please her fully years three --
This is to say, to do her full pleasure.
A wife requires constant attention.
I pray you that you be not displeased."
"Well," said this January, "and hast thou spoken?
Straw for thy Seneca, and for thy proverbs!
I would not give a bread basket full of herbs
For academic talk. Wiser men than thou,
As thou hast heard, assented right now
To my purpose. Placebo, what say you?"
"I say it is a cursed man," said he,
"That hinders matrimony, certainly."
And with that word they rise immediately,
And are agreed fully that he should
Be wedded when he pleased and where he would.
Exaggerated imagination and constant thought
From day to day became fixed in the soul 
Of January concerning his marriage.
Many a fair shape and many a fair visage
There passes through his heart night after night,
As if one took a mirror, polished bright,
And set it in a common market-place,
Then should he see full many a figure pace
By his mirror; and in the same manner
Did January within his thought imagine
About maidens which dwelt nearby him.
He knew not on which he might settle.
For if that one have beauty in her face,
Another stands so in the people's good opinion
For her seriousness and her goodness
That of the people greatest praise has she;
And some were rich and had a bad reputation.
But nevertheless, between earnestness and joking (in every way),
He at the last decided upon one,
And let all others from his heart go,
And chose her by his own authority;
For love is blind always, and can not see.
And when he was in his bed brought,
He portrayed in his heart and in his thought
Her fresh beauty and her tender age,
Her small waist, her arms long and slender,
Her wise self-control, her nobility,
Her womanly bearing, and her seriousness.
And when he on her had decided,
He thought his choice could not be bettered.
For when he himself had decided,
He thought each other man's wit so bad
That it would be impossible to reply
Against his choice; this was his fantasy.
His friends sent he to, at his request,
And prayed them to do him that pleasure,
That hastily they would come to him;
He would abridge their labor, one and all.
He needs no more to travel about;
He had decided on whom he would settle.
Placebo came, and also his friends quickly,
And first of all he asked them all a favor,
That none of them make any arguments 
Against the purpose which he has taken,
Which purpose was pleasing to God, said he,
And true ground of his prosperity.
He said there was a maiden in the town,
Who for beauty had great renown,
Even though she was of low rank;
Her youth and her beauty are enough for him .
Which maid, he said, he would have as his wife,
To lead in ease and holiness his life;
And thanked God that he might have her entirely,
So that no one shall share his bliss.
And prayed them to labor in this need,
And arrange that he fail not to succeed;
For then, he said, his spirit was at ease.
"Then there is," said he, "nothing that can displease me,
Save one thing sticks in my conscience,
Which I will tell in your presence.
"I have," said he, "heard said, full long ago,
There can no man have perfect blisses two --
This is to say, in earth and also in heaven.
For though he keep him from the seven sins,
And also from every branch of that same tree (of sin),
Yet is there such perfect felicity
And such great ease and pleasure in marriage
That ever I am frightened now in my old age
That I shall lead now so merry a life,
So pleasing, without woe and strife,
That I shall have my heaven here in earth.
For since that true heaven is bought so dear
With tribulation and great penance,
How should I then, who live in such pleasure
As all wedded men do with her wives,
Come to the bliss where Christ eternally lives?
This is my dread, and you, my brethren two,
Resolve this problem, I pray."
Justinus, who hated his folly,
Answered straight away in his mockery;
And because he would his long tale abridge,
He would cite no authority,
But said, "Sir, providing there be no obstacle
Other than this, God by his high miracle
And of his mercy may so for you work
That, before you have your rite of holy church (last sacrament),
You may repent of the wedded man's life,
In which you say there is no woe nor strife.
And else, God forbid that he should not send
A wedded man grace to repent himself 
Well more often than a single man!
And therefore, sir -- the best advice I know --
Despair you not, but have in your memory,
Perhaps she may be your purgatory!
She may be God's instrument and God's whip;
Then shall your soul up to heaven skip
Swifter than does an arrow out of a bow.
I hope to God, hereafter shall you know
That there is not so great felicity
In marriage, nor never more shall be,
That shall keep you from your salvation,
Providing that you use, as is proper and reasonable,
The pleasures of your wife moderately,
And that you please her not too amorously,
And that you keep yourself also from other sin.
My tale is done, for my wit is thin.
Be not afraid of this, my brother dear,
But let us wade out of this matter.
The Wife of Bath, if you have understood her,
Of marriage, which we have in hand,
Declared has full well in little space.
Now farewell. God have you in his grace."
And with this word this Justin and his brother
Have taken their leave, and each of them of other.
For when they saw that it must necessarily be,
They worked so, by sly and wise negotiation,
That she, this maiden who May was called,
As hastily as ever that she might
Shall wedded be unto this January.
I believe it would be too long to delay you,
If I told you of every legal document and bond
By which she was endowed with his land,
Or to hear of her rich array.
But finally the day is come
That to the church both are they went
To receive the holy sacrament (of marriage).
Forth comes the priest, with stole about his neck,
And commanded her to be like Sarah and Rebecca
In wisdom and in faithfulness of marriage;
And said his prayers, as is the usage,
And makes the sign of the cross over them, and prayed God should them bless,
And made all secure enough with holiness.
Thus are they wedded with solemnity,
And at the feast sits he and she
With other worthy folk upon the dais.
All full of joy and bliss is the palace,
And full of instruments and of foods,
The most delicious of all Italy.
Before them stood instruments of such sound
That Orpheus, nor Amphioun of Thebes,
Made never such a melody.
At every course then came loud minstrelsy
That never trumpeted Joab to be heard,
Nor that Theodomas, yet half so clear
At Thebes when the city was in danger.
Bacchus pours them the wine all around,
And Venus laughs upon every person,
For January had become her knight
And would test his spirit both 
In liberty, and also in marriage;
And with her torch in her hand about
Dances before the bride and all the company.
And certainly, I dare right well say this,
Hymen, that god of wedding is,
Saw never in his life so merry a wedded man.
Hold thou thy peace, thou poet Martianus Capella,
Who writes for us that same wedding merry
Of her, Philology, and him, Mercury,
And of the songs that the Muses sang!
Too small is both thy pen, and also thy tongue,
To describe this marriage.
When tender youth has wedded stooping age,
There is such mirth that it can not be written.
Try it yourself; then can you know
If I lie or not in this matter.
May, that sits with so benign a manner,
Her to behold it seemed an enchantment.
Queen Esther looked never with such an eye
On Ahasuerus, so meek a look has she.
I can not describe to you all her beauty.
But thus much of her beauty tell I can,
That she was like the bright morning of May,
Filled with all beauty and delight.
This January is ravished in a trance
At every time he looked on her face;
But in his heart he began to menace her 
That he that night in arms would her strain
Harder than ever Paris did Helen of Troy.
But nevertheless yet had he great pity
That that same night he must offend her,
And thought, "Alas! O tender creature,
Now would God you might well endure
All my desire, it is so sharp and keen!
I am afraid you shall not be able to endure it.
But God forbid that I did all my might!
Now would God that it were become night,
And that the night would last evermore.
I would that all this people were gone."
And finally he takes all possible pains,
As he best could, so far as good manners allowed, 
To hasten them from the dinner in subtle manner.
The time came that it was reasonable to rise;
And after that men dance and drink deeply,
And spiced cakes all about the house they passed,
And full of joy and bliss is every man --
All but a squire, called Damian,
Who carved before the knight full many a day.
He was so ravished on his lady May
That for the very pain he was nearly crazy.
Almost he fainted and swooned where he stood,
So sorely has Venus hurt him with her torch,
As she carried it dancing in her hand;
And to his bed he went hastily.
No more of him at this time speak I,
But there I let him weep enough and complain
Until fresh May will rue on his pain.
O perilous fire, that in the bedstraw breeds!
O enemy in one's household, that offers his service!
O servant traitor, false domestic servant,
Like to the sly untrue adder in one's bosom,
God protect us all from your acquaintance!
O January, drunk with pleasure
In marriage, see how thy Damian,
Thine own squire and thy servant from birth,
Intends to do thee villainy.
God grant thee thy foe in thy household to espy!
For in this world is no worse pestilence
Than a foe in thy household always in thy presence.
The sun has completed his daily journey;
No longer can its body sojourn
On the horizon, in that latitude.
Night with its mantle, that is dark and rude,
Did overspread the hemisphere about;
For which departed is this cheerful crowd
From January, with thanks on all sides.
Home to their houses cheerfully they ride,
Where they attend to their affairs as they pleased
And when they see their time, go to rest.
Soon after that, this hasty January
Would go to bed; he would no longer tarry.
He drinks mulled wine, claret, and strong white wine
With hot spices to increase his desire;
And many a very fine aphrodisiac has he,
Such as the cursed monk, Dan Constantine,
Has written in his book "Concerning Intercourse";
To eat them all he was not at all averse.
And to his private friends thus said he:
"For God's love, as soon as it can be done,
Have all this house emptied in courteous manner."
And they have done right as he will command.
Men drink and draw the curtain (dividing the room) straightway.
The bride was brought to bed as still as stone;
And when the bed was by the priest blessed,
Out of the chamber has every one gone,
And January has fast in arms taken
His fresh May, his paradise, his mate.
He lulls her; he kisses her full often;
With thick bristles of his beard rough,
Like to the skin of a shark, sharp as brier --
For he was all freshly shaved in his fashion --
He rubs her about her tender face,
And said thus, "Alas! I must do injury
To you, my spouse, and you greatly offend
Before the time comes that I will down descend.
But nevertheless, consider this," said he,
"There is no workman, whosoever he be,
That can work both well and hastily;
This will be done at leisure perfectly.
It does not matter how long we play;
In true wedlock we two are coupled,
And blessed be the yoke that we are in,
For in our acts we can do no sin.
A man can do no sin with his wife,
Nor hurt himself with his own knife,
For we have leave by the law to enjoy ourselves."
Thus labors he until the day dawned;
And then he takes a bit of bread soaked in fine claret,
And upright in his bed then sits he,
And after that he sang full loud and clear,
And kissed his wife, and acted lecherously.
He was frisky as a colt, full of wantonness,
And full of chatter as a spotted magpie.
The slack skin about his neck shakes
While he sang, so chants he and croaks.
But God knows what May thought in her heart,
When she saw him sitting up in his shirt,
In his night-cap, and with his lean neck;
She rates his playing not worth a bean.
Then said he thus, "My rest will I take;
Now day is come, I can no longer remain awake."
And down he laid his head and slept until nine.
And afterwards, when he saw his time,
Up rises January; but fresh May
Held her chamber until the fourth day,
As is the best usage of wives.
For every labor sometime must have rest,
Or else long can he not endure;
This is to say, no living creature,
Be it of fish, or bird, or beast, or man.
Now will I speak of woeful Damian,
That languishes for love, as you shall hear;
Therefore I speak to him in this manner:
I say, "O innocent Damian, alas!
Answer to my question, in this case.
How shalt thou to thy lady, fresh May,
Tell thy woe? She will always say nay.
Also if thou speak, she will thy woe reveal.
God be thy help! I can no better say."
This sick Damian in Venus' fire
So burns that he dies for desire,
For which he put his life at risk.
No longer could he in this way endure,
But secretly a writing set he borrowed,
And in a letter wrote he all his sorrow,
In the manner of a poetic lament or a song,
Unto his fair, fresh lady May;
And in a purse of silk which hung on his shirt
He has put it, and laid it at his heart.
The moon, that was at noon that same day
That January has wedded fresh May
In two degrees of Taurus, was into Cancer glided;
So long has May in her chamber abided,
As custom is unto these nobles all.
A bride shall not eat in the hall
Until four days, or three days at the least,
Are passed; then let her go to feast.
The fourth day completed from noon to noon,
When the high mass was done,
In hall this January and May sit,
As fresh as is the bright summer's day.
And so befell that this good man
Remembered this Damian,
And said, "Saint Mary! how can this be,
That Damian does not attend on me?
Is he always sick, or how can this happen?"
His squires, who stood there beside,
Excused him because of his sickness,
Which prevented him from doing his duties;
No other cause might make him tarry.
"I am sorry about that," said this January,
"He is a gentle squire, by my troth!
If he died, it would be a harm and a pity.
He is as wise, discreet, and as circumspect
As any man I know of his rank,
And moreover manly, and also willing to serve,
And to be a worthy man right able.
But after dinner, as soon as ever I can,
I will myself visit him, and also May,
To do him all the comfort that I can."
And for that word every man blessed him,
That of his goodness and his graciousness 
He would so comfort in sickness
His squire, for it was a gentle deed.
"My Lady," said this January, "take good heed,
At after-dinner you with all your women,
When you have been in chamber out of this hall,
That all you go see this Damian.
Cheer him up -- he is a gentle man;
And tell him that I will him visit,
When I have done nothing but rested myself a little;
And hurry yourself, for I will wait
Until you sleep fast by my side."
And with that word he began to him to call
A squire, that was master of ceremonies of his hall,
And told him certain things, what he wanted.
This fresh May has held straight her way
With all her women unto Damian.
Down by his bed's side sits she then,
Comforting him as graciously as she can.
This Damian, when he saw his opportunity,
In a secret way his purse and also his letter,
In which he had written his desire,
Has put into her hand, without (doing) more,
Save that he sighs wonderfully deep and sore,
And softly to her right thus said he:
"Mercy! And (I ask) that you not discover me,
For I am dead if this thing be known."
This purse has she within her bosom hidden
And went her way; you get no more from me.
But unto January come is she,
Who on his bed's side sits full softly.
He takes her, and kisses her full often,
And laid him down to sleep, and that straightway.
She pretended that she must go
Where you know that every person must go by necessity;
And when she of this letter has taken heed,
She tore it all to pieces at the last,
And in the privy softly threw it.
Who is perplexed now but fair fresh May?
Down by old January she lay,
Who slept until the cough has him awaked.
Straightway he prayed her to strip herself all naked;
He would of her, he said, have some pleasure;
He said her clothes got in his way,
And she obeys, whether she wants to or not.
But lest that prudish folk be with me wroth,
How he worked, I dare not tell to you,
Or whether she thought it paradise or hell.
But here I let them work in their way
Until bell for evening prayers rang and they had to arise.
Were it by destiny or by chance,
Were it by astronomical influence or by nature,
Or configuration of the stars, that in such a state
The heaven stood that time that it fortunate
Was to present a petition concerning Venus' works --
For every thing has time, as say these clerks --
To any woman to get her love,
I can not say; but great God above,
That knows that no act is without cause,
May he judge of all, for I will hold my peace.
But truth is this, how this fresh May
Has taken such impression that day
Of pity for this sick Damian
That from her heart she can not drive
The thought to comfort him.
"Certainly," thought she, "whomever this thing may displease
I care not, for here I him assure
To love him best of any creature,
Though he had no more than his shirt."
Lo, pity runs soon in gentle heart!
Here can you see what excellent generosity
In women is, when they carefully deliberate a matter.
Some tyrant is, as there be many a one
Who has a heart as hard as any stone,
Who would have let him die in the place
Well rather than have granted him her grace,
And rejoice in her cruel pride,
And care not to be a homicide.
This gentle May, filled full of pity,
In her own hand a letter made she,
In which she grants him her true grace.
There lacks nothing but only day and place
Where she might satisfy his desires,
For it shall be right as he will devise.
And when she saw her time, upon one day
To visit this Damian goes May,
And craftily this letter down she thrust
Under his pillow; let him read it if he wishes.
She takes him by the hand and hard him squeezes
So secretly that no one knew of it,
And bade him be all healthy, and forth she went
To January, when he for her sent.
Up rises Damian the next morning;
All passed was his sickness and his sorrow.
He combs himself, he preens and neatens himself,
He does all that his lady desires and pleases,
And also to January he goes as humbly
As ever did a dog trained to hunt with an archer.
He is so pleasant unto every man
(For craft is all, whoever can do it)
That every one is eager to speak good of him,
And fully in his lady's favor he stood.
Thus leave I Damian going about his business,
And in my tale forth I will proceed.
Some clerks maintain that felicity
Consists of delight, and therefore certainly he,
This noble January, with all his might,
In a respectable manner, as is suitable to a knight,
Arranged for himself to live full voluptuously.
His lodging, his clothing, as suitably
To his degree was made as is a king's.
Amongst others of his suitable things,
He made a garden, walled all with stone;
So fair a garden know I anywhere none.
For, beyond doubt, I truly suppose
That he who wrote the Romance of the Rose
Could not the beauty of it well describe;
Nor Priapus could not be adequate,
Though he be god of gardens, to tell
The beauty of the garden and the well
That stood under a laurel always green.
Very often he, Pluto, and his queen,
Proserpine, and all their fairies,
Amused themselves and made melody
About that well, and danced, as men told.
This noble knight, this January the old,
Such pleasure has in it to walk and play,
That he will no one allow to bear the key
Save he himself; for of the small gate
He bore always of silver a latchkey,
With which, when he desired, he unlocked it.
And when he would pay his wife her marital debt
In summer season, thither would he go,
And May his wife, and no one but those two;
And things which that were not done abed,
He in the garden performed and accomplished them.
And in this way, many a merry day,
Lived this January and fresh May.
But worldly joy can not always endure
To January, nor to any creature.
O sudden chance! O thou Fortune unstable!
Similar to the scorpion so deceitful,
That flatter with thy head when thou wilt sting;
Thy tail is death, through thy poisoning.
O brittle joy! O sweet venom deceitful!
O monster, that so subtly can disguise
Thy gifts under appearance of steadfastness,
That thou deceivest both high and low (everyone)!
Why hast thou January thus deceived,
Thou who had received him for thy closest friend ?
And now thou hast deprived him of both his eyes,
For sorrow of which he desires to die.
Alas, this noble generous January,
Amid his pleasure and his prosperity,
Is grown blind, and that all suddenly.
He weeps and he wails pitifully;
And with all this the fire of jealousy,
Lest that his wife should fall in some folly,
So burned his heart that he sincerely wished 
That some man both her and him had slain.
For neither after his death nor in his life
Would he that she were neither lover nor wife,
But ever live as widow in clothes black,
Solitary as the turtledove that lost has her mate.
But at the last, after a month or two,
His sorrow abated, truth to say;
For when he knew it can not be otherwise,
He patiently accepted his adversity,
Except that, no doubt, he can not refrain
From being more jealous all the time;
Which jealousy was so excessive
That neither in hall, nor in any other house,
Nor in any other place, no longer,
He would suffer her to ride or walk,
Unless he had a hand always on her;
For which full often weeps fresh May,
Who loves Damian so graciously
That she must either die suddenly
Or else she must have him as she wishes.
She expects that her heart would burst.
Upon that other side Damian
Is become the most sorrowful man
That ever was, for neither night nor day
Could he speak one word to fresh May,
Regarding his purpose, of any such matter,
Without January's hearing it,
Who had a hand upon her always.
But nevertheless, by writing to and fro
And secret signs he knew what she meant,
And she knew also the aim of his plan.
O January, what might it thee avail,
Though thou could see as far as ships sail?
For it is as good to be deceived when blind
As to be deceived when a man can see.
Lo, Argus, who had a hundred eyes,
For all that ever he could peer or pry,
Yet was he deceived, and, God knows, so are others
That confidently suppose indeed that it is not so.
To overlook (trouble) is an advantage, I say no more.
This fresh May, whom I spoke of formerly,
In warm wax has made an impression of the latchkey 
That January carried of the small gate,
By which into his garden often he went;
And Damian, who knew all her plan,
The latchkey counterfeited secretly.
There is no more to say, but hastily
Some wonder by this latchkey shall betide,
Which you shall hear, if you will abide.
O noble Ovid, full truth sayest thou, God knows,
What trick is it, though (finding) it be long and painful,
That Love will not find it out in some manner?
By Pyramus and Thisbe can one learn;
Though they were kept full long strictly in every way,
They are agreed, whispering through a wall,
Where no one could have found such a trick.
But now to purpose: before eight days 
Were passed [of] the month of [June], it happened
That January has caught so great a desire,
Through incitement of his wife, to enjoy himself
In his garden, and no one (there) but those two,
That in a morning unto his May says he:
"Rise up, my wife, my love, my noble lady!
The turtle dove's voice is heard, my dove sweet;
The winter is gone with all his rains wet.
Come forth now, with thy dove-like eyes!
How fairer are thy breasts than is wine!
The garden is enclosed all about;
Come forth, my white spouse! Beyond doubt
Thou hast me wounded in my heart, O wife!
No blemish on thee knew I all my life.
Come forth, and let us take our pleasure;
I chose thee for my wife and my comfort."
Such old ignorant words used he.
To Damian a sign made she,
That he should go before with his latchkey.
This Damian then has opened the gate,
And in he hurried, and that in such a way
That no one could either see or hear it,
And quickly he sits still under a bush.
This January, as blind as is a stone,
With May in his hand, and no one else,
Into his fresh garden has gone,
And closed the gate quickly.
"Now wife," said he, "here is no one but thou and I,
That art the creature that I best love.
For by that Lord that sits in heaven above,
I had rather die on a knife
Than thee offend, true dear wife!
For God's sake, think how I thee chose,
Not for any greed, doubtless,
But only for the love I had to thee.
And although I be old and can not see,
Be to me true, and I will tell you why.
Three things, certainly, shall you win thereby:
First, love of Christ, and to yourself honor,
And all my heritage, town and tower;
I give it to you, draw up deeds as you please;
This shall be done to-morrow before sun goes to rest,
As God my soul may bring in bliss.
I pray you first, to seal the contract, you kiss me;
And though that I be jealous, blame me not.
You are so deeply imprinted in my thought
That, when I consider your beauty
And in addition to that the unsuitable old age of me,
I can not, certainly, though I should die,
Bear to be out of your company
For true love; this is without doubt.
Now kiss me, wife, and let us roam about."
This fresh May, when she these words heard,
Graciously to January answered,
But first of all she began to weep.
"I have," said she, "a soul to keep
As well as you, and also my honor,
And of my wifehood that same tender flower,
Which I have entrusted in your hand,
When the priest to you my body bound;
Wherefore I will answer in this manner,
By the leave of you, my lord so dear:
I pray to God that never dawn the day
That I do not die, as foully as woman can,
If ever I do unto my kin that shame,
Or else I damage so my name,
That I be false; and if I commit that offense,
Have me stripped and put me in a sack,
And in the next river have me drowned.
I am a gentle woman and no wench.
Why speak you thus? But men are always untrue,
And women have reproof of you always.
You have no other manner of behavior, I believe,
Except to speak to us of distrust and reproof."
And with that word she saw where Damian
Sat in the bush, and she began to cough,
And with her finger signs made she
That Damian should climb upon a tree
That loaded was with fruit, and up he went.
For truly he knew all her plan,
And every sign that she could make,
Well better than January, her own mate,
For in a letter she had told him all
Of this matter, what he must do.
And thus I let him sit upon the pear tree,
And January and May roaming merrily.
Bright was the day, and blue the firmament;
Phoebus has his streams of gold down sent
To gladden every flower with his warmness.
He was that time in Gemini, as I guess,
But little from his declination
Of Cancer, Jove's exaltation.
And it so befell, that bright morning-tide
That in that garden, in the further side,
Pluto, that is king of Fairyland,
And many a lady in his company,
Following his wife, the queen Proserpine,
Whom he kidnapped out of Etna
While she gathered flowers in the mead --
In Claudian you can read the stories,
How in his grisly chariot he fetched her --
This king of Fairyland then set himself down
Upon a bench made of pieces of turf, fresh and green,
And right away thus said he to his queen:
"My wife," said he, "there can no one say nay;
The experience so proves every day
The treasons which women do to man.
Ten hundred thousand [tales] I can tell
(That are) famous concerning your faithlessness and frailty.
O Solomon, wise, and richest of wealth,
Filled with wisdom and with worldly glory,
Full worthy are thy words to (keep in) memory
To every one that wit and reason knows.
Thus praises he yet the goodness of man:
`Amongst a thousand men yet found I one,
But of all women found I none.'
"Thus says the king that knows your wickedness.
And Jesus, son of Sirak, as I suppose,
Speaks reverence of you but seldom.
A wild fir and corrupt pestilence
Fall upon your bodies yet to-night!
See you not this honorable knight,
Because, alas, that he is blind and old,
His own man shall make him cuckold.
Lo, where he sits, the lecher, in the tree!
Now will I grant, of my majesty,
Unto this old, blind, worthy knight
That he shall have again his eyes' sight,
When his wife would do him villainy.
Then shall he know all her harlotry,
In reproof of both her and many others."
"You shall?" said Proserpine, "will you so?
Now by my mother's father's soul I swear
That I shall give her sufficient answer,
And all women afterwards, for her sake,
That, though they be in any guilt taken,
With bold face they shall themselves excuse,
And bear them down who would them accuse.
For lack of answer none of them shall die.
Although a man had seen a thing with both his eyes,
Yet shall we women face it out boldly,
And weep, and swear, and chide deceitfully,
So that you men shall be as ignorant as geese.
"What do I care for your authorities?
I know well that this Jew, this Solomon,
Found of us women many a fool.
But though he found no good woman,
Yet many another man has there found 
Women full true, full good, and virtuous.
Witness on them that dwell in Christ's house (heaven);
With martyrdom they proved their constancy.
The Roman histories also remind us
Of many a genuine, true wife also.
But, sir, be not angry, even though it be so,
Though he said he found no good woman,
I pray you take the meaning of the man;
He meant thus, that in perfect goodness
There is no one but God, neither man nor woman.
"Ah! by him who is the only true God,
Why make you so much of Solomon?
Why though he made a temple, God's house?
Why though he was rich and glorious?
So made he also a temple of false gods.
How might he do a thing that more forbidden is?
By God, however approvingly you gloss over his name,
He was a lecher and an idolater,
And in his old age he true God forsook;
And if God had not, as says the book,
Spared him for his father's sake, he should
Have lost his reign sooner than he would have wanted.
I reckon all the villainy
That you of women write not worth a butterfly!
I am a woman, I must necessarily speak,
Or else swell until my heart breaks.
For since he said that we are chatterers,
As ever whole I may enjoy my hair (remain alive),
I shall not cease, for any courtesy,
To speak harm of him that would do us dishonor."
"My Lady," said this Pluto, "be no longer angry;
I give it up! But since I swore my oath
That I would grant him his sight again,
My word shall stand, I warn you certainly.
I am a king; it is not proper for me to lie."
"And I," said she, "a queen of Fairy!
Her answer shall she have, I declare.
Let us have no more words concerning this;
For truly, I will no longer contradict you."
Now let us turn again to January,
That in the garden with his fair May
Sings full merrier than the parrot,
"You love I best, and shall, and none other."
So long about the garden paths is he gone,
Until he was come in front of that same pear tree
Where this Damian sits full merry
On high among the fresh leaves green.
This fresh May, who is so bright and sheen,
Began to sigh, and said, "Alas, my side!
Now sire," said she, "for whatever may happen,
I must have some of the pears that I see,
Or I must die, so sore I long
To eat some of the small green pears.
Help, for her love that is of heaven queen!
I tell you well, a woman in my condition
May have for fruit so great an appetite
That she may die but she have some of it."
"Alas," said he, "that I do not have here a servant boy
That could climb! Alas, alas," said he,
"For I am blind!" "Yea, sir, no matter," said she;
"But would you grant, for God's sake,
The pear tree within your arms to take,
For well I know that you mistrust me,
Then should I climb well enough," said she,
"If I my foot might set upon your back."
"Certainly," said he, "there shall be no lack,
(Even if) I might you help with my heart's blood."
He stoops down, and on his back she stood,
And caught her by a branch, and up she goes --
Ladies, I pray you that you be not angry;
I can not use circumlocutions, I am an unlearned man --
And suddenly at once this Damian
Pulled up the smock, and in he thrust.
And when Pluto saw this great wrong,
To January he gave again his sight,
And made him see as well as he ever could.
And when he had recovered his sight again,
There was never man of anything so happy,
But on his wife his thought was evermore.
Up to the tree he cast his eyes two,
And saw that Damian had treated his wife 
In such a manner it can not be expressed,
Unless I would speak crudely;
And up he gave a roaring and a cry,
As does the mother when the child shall die:
"Out! Help! Alas! Help!" he began to cry,
"O brazen crude lady, what dost thou?"
And she answered, "Sir, what ails you?
Have patience and reason in your mind.
I have helped you with both your eyes blind.
Upon peril of my soul, I shall not lie,
As I was taught, to heal with your eyes,
Was no thing better, to make you to see,
Than to struggle with a man upon a tree.
God knows, I did it in full good intent."
"Struggle?" said he, "Yea, indeed in it went!
God give you both a shameful death to die!
He screwed thee; I saw it with my eyes,
And else may I be hanged by the neck!"
"Then is," said she, "my medicine false;
For certainly, if you could see,
You would not say these words unto me.
You have some glimpse, and no perfect sight."
"I see," said he, "as well as ever I could,
Thanked be God! With both my eyes two,
And by my troth, it seemed to me he did thee so."
"You are dazed, dazed, good sir," said she;
"This thanks have I because I have made you see.
Alas," said she, "that ever I was so kind!"
"Now, lady," said he, "let all pass out of mind.
Come down, my dear, and if I have misspoken,
So God help me, I am very sorry.
But, by my father's soul, I thought to have seen
How this Damian had by thee laid,
And thy smock had lain upon his breast."
"Yea, sir," said she, "you may think as you please.
But, sir, a man that wakes out of his sleep,
He can not suddenly well take heed
Of a thing, nor see it perfectly,
Until he be fully awakened.
Right so a man that long has blind been,
Can not suddenly so well see,
First when his sight is newly come again,
As he that has a day or two been able to see.
Until your sight be settled a while
There may full many a sight deceive you.
Beware, I pray you, for by heaven's king,
Full many a man supposes to see a thing,
And it is entirely different than it seems.
He that misunderstands, he misjudges."
And with that word she leaped down from the tree.
This January, who is glad but he?
He kisses her and embraces her full often,
And on her womb he strokes her full softly,
And to his palace he has her led home.
Now, good men, I pray you to be glad.
Thus ends here my tale of January;
God bless us, and his mother Saint Mary!
"Ah! God's mercy!" said our Host then,
"Now such a wife I pray God keep me from!
Lo, what tricks and craftiness
Are in women! For always as busy as bees
Are they, us innocent men to deceive,
And from the truth ever will they deviate;
By this Merchant's tale it is well proven.
But doubtless, as true as any steel
I have a wife, though that she poor be,
But of her tongue, a blabbing shrew is she,
And yet she has a heap of other vices;
Thereof no matter! Let all such things go by.
But know you what? In secret be it said,
I sorely rue that I am unto her tied.
For if I should reckon every vice
Which she has, indeed I would be too foolish.
And the cause why? It should reported be
And told to her by some of this company --
By whom, it needs not to declare,
Since women know how to display such wares;
And also my wit suffices not concerning this
To tell all; therefore my tale is done."
"My dear love," she said, "Oh my Don John,
I wish I could hide this secret,
But it must come out; I can delay no longer,
My husband is to me the worst man
That ever was since the world began.
But since I am a wife, it does not suit me
To tell any one of our private matters,
Neither in bed nor in any other place;
God forbid I should tell it, for His grace!
A wife should say nothing of her husband
Except what is to his honor, so far as I can understand;
Except unto you this much I shall tell:
So help me God, he is not worth at all
In any way the value of a fly.
But yet his miserliness grieves me most.
And well you know that women naturally
Desire six things as well as I:
They would that their husbands should be
Vigorous and wise, and rich, and moreover generous,
And obedient unto his wife and vigorous in bed.
But by that same Lord that for us bled,
To clothe myself in a manner that does honor to my husband,
On next Sunday I must of necessity pay
A hundred franks, or else I am lost.
Yet I would rather that I were never born
Than a disgrace or dishonor were done to me;
And also if my husband might discover it,
I would be as good as lost; and therefore I pray you,
Lend me this sum, or else I must die.
Don John, I say, lend me these hundred franks.
By God, I will not fail to give you my thanks,
If it pleases you to do what I pray of you.
For at a certain day I will pay you,
And do to you whatever pleasure and service
That I can do, exactly as you please to command.
And unless I do so, God take on me vengeance
As foul as ever had Ganelon of France."
This gentle monk answered in this manner:
"Now truly, my own dear lady,
I have," he said, "on you such great pity
That I swear to you, and pledge you my word,
That when your husband is gone to Flanders,
I will deliver you out of this care;
For I will bring you a hundred franks."
And with that word he caught her by the flanks,
And embraces her hard, and kissed her often.
"Go now your way," he said, "all still and quietly,
And let us dine as soon as you can;
For by my sundial it is almost noon.
Go now, and be as true as I shall be."
"Now God forbid (anything) else, sir," she said;
And forth she goes as jolly as a magpie,
And ordered the cooks that they should hasten,
So that people could dine, and that quickly.
Up to her husband this wife is gone,
And boldly knocks at his counting-house door.
"Who is there?" he said. "By Saint Peter! it's me,"
Said she; "What, sir! how long will you fast?
How long a time will you reckon and calculate
Your sums, and your books, and your business matters?
The devil take all such reckonings!
You have enough, by God, of God's gifts;
Come down to-day, and let your moneybags be.
Are you not ashamed that Don John
Must go fasting all this day long?
What! let us hear a mass and go dine."
"Wife," this man said, "little canst thou guess
The worrisome preoccupations that we have.
For of us merchants, as God may save me,
And by that lord that is called Saint Yve,
Scarcely amongst twelve shall two thrive
Continually, surviving unto our age.
We may well seem cheerful and put on a good face,
And endure the world as it may be,
And keep our condition private, 
Until we are dead, or else we go on
A pilgrimage, or go out of the way (in hiding).
And therefore I have great need
To plan carefully upon this tricky world,
For always we must stand in fear
Of chance and fortune in our business dealings.
"I will go to Flanders tomorrow at daylight,
And come back again, as soon as ever I can.
For which, my dear wife, I beseech thee,
Be to every creature humble and meek,
And be diligent to guard our possessions,
And properly govern our house well.
Thou hast enough, in every sort of way,
That may suffice to a prosperous household.
You lack no supplies nor victuals;
Thou shalt not lack silver in thy purse ."
And with that word he shut his counting house-door,
And down he goes, no longer would he delay.
But hastily a mass was there said,
And speedily the tables were laid,
And quickly they sped to the dinner,
And richly the merchant fed this monk.
At after-dinner Don John soberly
Took aside this merchant, and privately
He said to him thus: "Cousin, it stands so,
That I see well to Bruges you will go.
God and Saint Augustine speed and guide you!
I pray you, cousin, that you ride carefully.
Govern yourself also in your diet
Moderately, and especially in this heat.
Between us two there need be no elaborate courtesies;
Farewell, cousin; God protect you from trouble!
And if there be any thing by day or night,
If it lie in my power and my might,
That you will ask of me in any way,
It shall be done exactly as you will specify.
"One thing, before you go, if it may be,
I would pray of you: to lend me
A hundred franks, for a week or two,
For a certain number of beasts that I must buy,
With which to stock a place that is ours.
So help me God, I would it were yours!
I surely shall not fail to repay you on the day it is due,
Not for a thousand franks, by so much as twenty minutes.
But let this thing be secret, I pray you,
For yet to-night I must buy these beasts.
And now fare well, my own dear cousin;
Many thanks for your expenditures and for your hospitality."
This noble merchant courteously straightway
Answered and said, "Oh my cousin, Don John,
Now surely this is a small request.
My gold is yours, whenever it pleases you,
And not only my gold, but my merchandise.
Take what you please; God forbid that you stint.
"But there is one thing, you know it well enough
About merchants, that their money is their plough.
We may borrow while we have a good name,
But to be without gold, it is no joke.
Pay it back when it is convenient for you;
According to my power, I would be very glad to please you."
These hundred franks he fetched forth quickly,
And privately he gave them to Don John.
No creature in all this world knew of this loan
Except for this merchant and Don John alone.
They drink, and speak, and stroll about a while and amuse themselves,
Until Don John rides to his abbey.
The morning came, and forth this merchant rides
To Flanders; his apprentice guides him well
Until he came merrily into Bruges.
Now goes this merchant quickly and busily
About his business, and buys and obtains credit.
He neither plays at the dice nor dances,
But as a merchant (should), shortly to tell,
He led his life, and there I let him dwell.
The Sunday next after the merchant was gone,
To Seint-Denis is come Don John,
With the top of his head and beard all fresh and newly shaved.
In all the house there was not so humble a servant boy,
Nor any one else, who was not very glad
That my lord Don John was come again.
And shortly, to go directly to the point,
This fair wife agreed with Don John
That for these hundred franks he should all night
Have her in his arms flat on her back;
And this agreement was performed in deed.
In mirth all night they lead a busy life
Until it was day, and Don John went his way,
And bade the household "Farewell, have good day!"
For none of them, nor any one in the town,
Has of Don John any suspicion at all.
And forth he rides home to his abbey,
Or where he pleases; I say no more of him.
This merchant, when the fair was ended,
Did return to Seint-Denis,
And with his wife he makes merriment and good cheer,
And tells her that merchandise is so expensive
That of necessity he had to make an arrangement for credit
For he was bound in a formal pledge
To pay twenty thousand shields quickly.
For which this merchant is gone to Paris
To borrow from certain friends that he had
A certain number of franks; and some with him he brought.
And when he had come into the town,
For great fondness and great affection,
He first goes unto Don John to visit him;
Not to ask or borrow money from him,
But in order to know and see about his welfare,
And to tell him of his business,
As friends do when they are met together.
Don John makes him festive and merry hospitality,
And he told him in turn, in great detail,
How he had bought well and successfully,
Thanked be God, all of his merchandise,
Except that he must, no matter what, 
Arrange for a loan, as for his best (course of action),
And then he would be in joy and rest.
Don John answered, "Certainly, I am glad
That you are come home again in good health.
And if I were rich, as I may have bliss,
You should not lack twenty thousand shields ,
For you so kindly this other day
Lent me gold; and as I know how and can,
I thank you, by God and by Saint James!
But nonetheless, I gave unto our dame,
Your wife, at home, the same gold in return
Upon your counting board; she knows it well, certainly,
By certain proofs that I can tell her.
Now, by your leave, I can no longer dwell;
Our abbot will go out of this town very soon,
And I must go in his company.
Greet well our dame, my own sweet niece,
And farewell, dear cousin, until we meet!"
This merchant, who was very prudent and wise,
Has obtained credit, and paid also in Paris
To certain Lombard bankers, ready in their hand (in cash),
The sum of gold, and redeemed his bond from them;
And home he goes, merry as a parrot,
For well he knew he stood in such condition
That by necessity he must earn in that journey
A thousand franks above all his costs.
His wife very readily met him at the gate,
As was her long established custom at all times,
And all that night they devoted themselves to mirth.
For he was rich and clearly out of debt.
When it was day, this merchant did embrace
His wife anew, and kissed her on her face,
And up he goes and makes it full tough.
"No more," said she, "by God, you have enough!"
And wantonly again she played with him
Until at the last thus this merchant said:
"By God," said he, "I am a little angry
With you, my wife, although I am reluctant to be so.
And do you know why? By God, because I guess
That you have made a sort of estrangement
Between me and my cousin Don John.
You should have warned me, before I had gone,
That he had paid a hundred franks to you
In cash; and considered himself ill used,
Because I spoke to him about borrowing;
It seemed so, by his countenance.
But nonetheless, by God, our heavenly king,
I thought not to ask any thing of him.
I pray thee, wife, do so no more;
Tell me always, before I go from thee,
If any debtor has in my absence
Paid thee, lest through thy negligence
I might ask of him a thing that he has paid."
This wife was not afeared nor afraid,
But boldly she said, and that immediately,
"By Mary, I defy the false monk, Don John!
I care not a bit for his proofs;
He gave me a specific amount of gold, that I know well --
What! Evil luck on his monk's snout!
For, God knows it, I thought, without doubt,
That he had given it to me because of you
To do (something) with it for my honor and my benefit,
Because of kinship, and also for the good cheer
That he has had very many times here.
But since I see I stand in this difficulty,
I will answer you shortly to the point.
You have more slow-paying debtors than I am!
For I will pay you well and readily
From day to day, and if it so be that I fail,
I am your wife; score it upon my tally (tail),
And I shall pay as soon as ever I can.
For by my troth, I have on my clothing,
And not on waste, spent every bit;
And because I have spent it so well
For your honor, for God's sake, I say,
Do not be angry, but let us laugh and play.
You shall have my pretty body as a pledge;
By God, I will not pay you except in bed!
Forgive me, my own dear spouse;
Turn hitherward, and cheer up."
This merchant saw there was no remedy,
And to chide would be nothing but folly,
Since the thing can not be amended.
"Now wife," he said, "and I forgive thee;
But, by thy life, be no longer so generous.
Take better care of thy goods, this I give thee as a command."
Thus ends my tale, and God send us 
Tallying (Tailing) enough unto our lives' end. Amen
"Well said, by the body of our Lord," said our Host,
"Now long may thou sail by the coast,
Sir gentle master, gentle mariner!
God give the monk a thousand cartloads of bad years!
A ha! Fellows, beware of such a trick!
The monk made a monkey of the man,
And of his wife as well, by Saint Augustine!
Invite no more monks into your dwelling.
"But now pass over that, and let us look around to see
Who shall now, first of all this company, tell 
Another tale;" and with that word he said,
As courteously as if he had been a maiden,
"My Lady Prioress, by your leave,
If I knew I should not grieve you,
I would judge that you should tell 
A tale next, if it so were that you would.
Now will you grant this, my lady dear?"
"Gladly," said she, and said as you shall hear.
Our Host saw well that the bright sun
The arc of his twelve-hour day has run
One fourth, and half an hour and more,
And though he was not far advanced in learning,
He knew it was the eighteenth day
Of April, that is messenger to May;
And saw well that the shadow of every tree
Was in length the same quantity
As was the erect body that caused it.
And therefore by the shadow he judged
That Phoebus, which shone so clear and bright,
Five and forty degrees had climbed on height,
And for that day, in that latitude,
It was ten o'clock, he did conclude,
And suddenly he pulled his horse about.
"Gentlemen," said he, "I warn you, all this company,
One fourth of this day is gone.
Now for the love of God and of Saint John,
Lose no time, insofar as you can.
Gentlemen, the time wastes away night and day,
And steals from us, in part imperceptibly when sleeping,
And in part through negligence when we are awake,
As does the stream that never turns back,
Descending from the mountain into the plain.
Well can Seneca and many a philosopher
Bewail time more than gold in coffer;
For `Loss of property may be recovered,
But loss of time ruins us,' said he.
It will not come again, without doubt,
No more than will Malkin's maidenhead,
When she has lost it in her wantonness.
Let us not grow moldy thus in idleness.
"Sir Man of Law," said he, "as you may have bliss,
Tell us a tale now, as was agreed.
You have submitted, through your free assent,
To stand in this case at my judgment.
Now fulfill your promise;
Then have you done your duty at the least."
"Host," said he, "in God's name, I assent;
To break our agreement is not my intent.
Promise is debt, and I will eagerly keep
All my promise, I can say no better.
For such law as a man gives another person,
He should himself use it, by right;
Thus our text will have it. But nonetheless, certainly,
Right now I can tell no suitable tale
That Chaucer, though he is ignorant
Of meters and of riming craftily,
Has (not already) said them in such English as he knows 
Long ago, as knows many a man;
And if he has not said them, dear brother,
In one book, he has said them in another.
For he has told of lovers up and down
More than Ovid made mention of 
In his Epistles, that are very old.
Why should I tell them, since they have been told?
"In youth he wrote about Ceyx and Alcion,
And since has he spoken of each one,
These noble wives and these lovers also.
Whoever will seek his large volume,
Called the Saints' Legend of Cupid,
There may he see the large wounds wide
Of Lucretia, and Thisbe of Babylon;
The sword of Dido (used) because of the false Aeneas;
The tree of Phyllis for her Demophon;
The complaint of Deianire and of Hermione,
Of Ariadne, and of Hypsipyle  --
The barren isle standing in the sea --
The drowned Leander for his Hero;
The tears of Helen, and also the woe
Of Briseis, and of thee, Laodamia;
The cruelty of thee, queen Medea,
Thy little children hanging by the neck,
Because of thy Jason, that was in love so false!
O Hypermnestra, Penelope, Alcestis,
Your wifehood he commends with the best!
"But certainly no word writes he
Of that wicked example of Canace,
Who loved her own brother sinfully --
Of such cursed stories I say fie! --
Or else of Apollonius of Tyre,
How that the cursed king Antiochus
Deprived his daughter of her maidenhead,
That is so horrible a tale to read,
When he threw her upon the pavement.
And therefore he, after careful consideration
Would never write in any of his compositions
Of such unnatural abominations,
Nor will I tell any such, if that I may.
"But of my tale what shall I do this day?
I would hate to be likened, doubtless,
To the Muses that men call Pierides --
Metamorphoses shows what I mean;
But nonetheless, I reckon it not worth a bean
Though I come after him with a humble dish.
I speak in prose, and let him make rhymes."
And with that word he, with a solemn demeanor,
Began his tale, as you shall after hear.
O hateful harm, condition of poverty!
By thirst, by cold, by hunger so distressed!
To ask help thou art ashamed in thy heart;
If thou ask for none, thou art so wounded by need 
That true need reveals all thy hidden wound!
Despite all you can do, thou must for indigence
Either steal, or beg, or borrow thy living expenses!
Thou blamest Christ and sayest full bitterly
He wrongly allots temporal riches;
Thy neighbor thou blamest sinfully,
And sayest thou hast too little and he has all.
"By my faith," sayest thou, "sometimes he shall pay for it,
When his tail shall burn in the live coals,
For he helps not the needy in their need."
Listen to what is the opinion of the wise:
"Better it is to die than to have poverty";
"Thy very neighbor will despise thee."
If thou be poor, farewell thy reverence!
Yet of the wise man take this advice:
"All the days of poor men are painful."
Beware, therefore, before thou come to that point!
If thou be poor, thy brother hates thee,
And all thy friends flee from thee, alas!
O rich merchants, full of prosperity are you,
O noble, o prudent folk, in such a case as this!
Your bags are not filled with double aces (a losing throw in dice),
But with six five, that is your winning number;
At Christmas merrily may you dance!
You seek land and sea for your winnings;
As wise folk you know all the condition
Of (foreign) lands; you are fathers of tidings
And tales, both of peace and of war.
I would right now be without any tales,
Were it not that a merchant, gone by is many a year,
Taught me a tale, which you shall hear.
In Syria once dwelt a company
Of rich merchants, and moreover trustworthy and true,
That wherever they sent their oriental goods,
Cloth of gold, and satins rich in color.
Their merchandise was so serviceable and so novel
That every person has desire to trade
With them, and also to sell them their goods.
Now it happened that the masters of that company
Have prepared themselves to travel to Rome;
Were it for business or for pleasure,
No other messenger would they thither send,
But came themselves to Rome; this is the sum of it.
And in such a place as they thought advantageous
For their purposes, they take their lodging.
These merchants have sojourned in that town
A certain length of time, as accorded with their desires.
And it so happened that the excellent renown
Of the Emperor's daughter, Lady Custance,
Was reported, in full detail,
Unto these Syrian merchants in such a manner,
From day to day, as I shall tell you.
This was the common opinion of every man:
"Our Emperor of Rome -- may God look after him! --
A daughter has that, since the world began,
To consider as well her goodness as beauty,
There was never such another as is she.
I pray to God to sustain her in honor,
And would she were of all Europe the queen.
"In her is great beauty, without pride,
Youth, without immaturity or folly;
In all her deeds virtue is her guide;
Humility has slain in her all tyranny.
She is mirror of all courtesy;
Her heart is a true chamber of holiness,
Her hand, minister of generosity in giving alms."
And all this opinion was true, as God is true.
But now to the point let us turn again.
These merchants have had their ships newly loaded,
And when they have this blissful maiden seen,
Home to Syria they have gone very happily,
And they conduct their business as they have done for years,
And live in prosperity; I can tell you no more.
Now it happened that these merchants stood in the good graces
Of him that was the Sultan of Syria;
For when they came from any foreign place,
He would, of his gracious courtesy,
Entertain them well, and busily seek out
News from various countries, to learn
The wonders that they could have seen or heard.
Amongst other things, specially,
These merchants have told him of Lady Custance 
Such great noble qualities in earnest, in detail,
That this Sultan has caught such great desire
To have her figure in his remembrance,
That all his desire and all his intense concern
Was to love her while his life may endure.
Perhaps in that large book
Which men call the heaven was written 
In stars, when he was born,
That he because of love should have his death, alas!
For in the stars, clearer than is glass,
Is written, God knows, whoever could read it,
The death of every man, without doubt.
In stars, many a winter before then,
Was written the death of Hector, Achilles,
Of Pompey, Julius, before they were born;
The strife of Thebes; and of Hercules,
Of Sampson, Turnus, and of Socrates
The death; but men's wits are so dull
That no person can well interpret it fully.
This Sultan for his privy council sent,
And, to pass briefly over this matter,
He has to them declared his intent,
And said to them, certainly, unless he could have the good fortune
To have Custance within a little time,
He was as good as dead; and ordered them hastily
To arrange some remedy to save his life .
Different men said different things;
They argue, consider alternatives;
Many a subtle argument they laid forth;
They speak of magic and deception.
But finally, in conclusion,
They can not see any advantage in that,
Nor in any other way, save for marriage.
Then saw they in that such difficulty
By way of reason, to speak all plainly, 
Because there was such difference
Between their two religions, that they say
They suppose that no "Christian prince would be willing
To wed his child under our sweet religion
That was taught us by Mohammed, our prophet."
And he answered, "Rather than I lose
Custance, I will be christened, doubtless.
I must be hers; I can choose no other.
I pray you to keep your arguments silent;  
Save my life, and be not negligent 
To get her who has my life in her keeping,
For in this woe I can not long endure."
What needs greater increase of words?
I say, by treaty and negotiation,
And by the pope's mediation,
And all the church, and all the knights,
That for the destruction of idolatry,
And for the increase of Christ's dear law,
They are agreed, as you shall hear:
That the Sultan and his baronage
And all his vassals should christened be,
And he shall have Custance in marriage,
And a certain amount of gold, I do not know how much;
And for this provided sufficient pledges.
This same agreement was sworn on either side;
Now, fair Custance, almighty God thee guide!
Now would some men expect, as I guess,
That I should tell all the preparations
That the Emperor, of his great nobility,
Has arranged for his daughter, Lady Custance.
Well may men know that such great preparation
No man can tell in a brief statement
As was provided for so important an occasion.
Bishops are appointed to go with her,
Lords, ladies, knights of renown,
And other folk enough; this is the sum of it;
And it is made known throughout the town
That every person, with great devotion,
Should pray Christ that He this marriage
Receive favorably and lend success to this voyage. 
The day is come of her departure;
I say, the woeful fatal day is come,
That there may be no longer tarrying,
But  to go forth they prepare themselves, one and all.
Custance, that was with sorrow all overcome,
Full pale arises, and prepares herself to go;
For well she sees there is no other possible conclusion. 
Alas, what wonder is it though she wept,
She who shall be sent to a foreign nation
From friends who so tenderly cared for her,
And to be bound under subjection
By one, (of whom) she knows not his character?
Husbands are all good, and have been for years;
Wives know that; I dare say you no more.
"Father," she said, "thy wretched child Custance,
Thy young daughter fostered up so tenderly,
And you, my mother, my greatest joy
Over all things, except Christ above,
Custance your child commends herself often
Unto your grace, for I must go to Syria,
Nor shall I never see you again with my eyes.
"Alas, unto the pagan world
I must go right now, since it is your will;
But Christ, that died for our redemption
Give me grace his commands to fulfill!
I, wretched woman, no matter though I die!
Women are born to servitude and suffering,
And to be under man's governance."
I believe at Troy, when Pirrus broke the wall
Before Ilion burned, at Thebes the city,
Nor at Rome, for the harm wrought by Hannibal
Who has vanquished Romans three times,
Was not heard such tender weeping for pity
As in the chamber was for her departing;
But forth she must go, whether she weeps or sings.
O first moving! Cruel firmament,
With thy daily motion that pushes ever
And hurls all from east to west
That naturally would go the other way,
Thy impetus set the heaven in such an arrangement
At the beginning of this dangerous voyage,
That cruel Mars has slain this marriage.
Unfortunate ascending oblique house, [see n.]
From which the lord, helpless, has fallen, alas,
Out of his angle into the most unfavorable house!
O Mars, o dominant planet, in this case!
O feeble moon, unhappy are thy steps!
Thou join thyself where thou art not (well) received;
Where thou were well, from thence art thou driven away.
Imprudent Emperor of Rome, alas!
Was there no astrologer in all thy town?
Is no time better than another in such a case?
For voyages is there no choice of a favorable time,
Especially for folk of noble social status?
Not when an exact date of a birth is known?
Alas, we are too ignorant or too slow in wit!
To ship is brought this woeful fair maid
Solemnly, with every ceremony.
"Now Jesus Christ be with you all!" she said;
There is no more, but "Farewell, fair Custance!"
She takes pains to make a cheerful appearance;
And forth I let her sail in this manner,
And turn I will again to my subject matter.
The mother of the Sultan, well of vices,
Espied has her son's full intention,
How he will leave his old sacrifices;
And right away she sent for her council,
And they are come to know what she intended.
And when this folk was assembled together,
She set herself down, and said as you shall hear.
"Lords," said she, "you know each one of you,
How my son is about to forsake
The holy laws of our Koran,
Given by God's messenger Mohammed.
But one vow to great God I promise,
The life shall rather out of my body go
Before Mohammed's law (goes) out of my heart!
"What should come to us from this new religion
Except slavery to our bodies and suffering,
And afterward to be dragged into hell,
Because we renounced our faith in Mohammed?
But, lords, will you make assurance,
As I shall say, assenting to my teaching,
And I shall make us safe for evermore?"
They swore and agree, every man,
To live with her and die, and by her stand,
And every one, in the best way he can,
To strengthen her shall try (to persuade) all his friends;
And she has this enterprise taken in hand,
Which you shall hear as I shall tell,
And to them all she spoke right in this manner:
"We shall first pretend to receive Christendom --
Cold water shall not grieve us but a little! --
And I shall such a feast and revel make
That, as I believe, I shall pay back the Sultan.
For though his wife be christened never so white,
She shall have need to wash away the red,
Though she a baptismal font full of water bring with her."
O Sultaness, root of iniquity!
Virago, thou Semiramis the second!
O serpent under (cover of) femininity,
Like the serpent deep in hell bound!
O feigned woman, that can destroy all 
Virtue and innocence, through thy malice,
That is bred in thee, nest of every vice!
O Satan, envious since that same day
That thou were chased from our heritage,
Well knowest thou the old way to women!
Thou madest Eva bring us into slavery;
Thou wilt destroy this Christian marriage.
Thy instrument thus -- alas the times! --
Makest thou of women, when thou wilt deceive.
This Sultaness, whom I thus blame and curse,
Privately had her council go their way.
Why should I in this tale longer tarry?
She rides to the Sultan on a day,
And said to him that she would renounce her religion,
And take Christendom from a priest's hands,
Repenting that she heathen was so long,
Beseeching him to do her that honor,
That she might have the Christian folk to feast --
"To please them I will work hard."
The Sultan says, "I will act according to your command."
And kneeling thanks her for that request.
So glad he was, he knew not what to say.
She kissed her son, and home she goes her way.
This Christian folk have come to land
In Syria, with a great solemn company,
And hastily this Sultan sent his messenger
First to his mother, and all the reign about,
And said his wife was come, without doubt,
And prayed her to ride to meet the queen,
The honor of his reign to sustain.
Large was the crowd, and rich was the assembly
Of Syrians and Romans met together;
The mother of the Sultan, richly dressed and gay,
Receives her with as glad a demeanor
As any mother might have for her daughter dear,
And to the nearest city there beside
At a slow pace solemnly they ride.
I do not believe the triumph of Julius,
Of which Lucan makes such a boastful account,
Was more royal nor more splendid
Than was the assembly of this blissful host.
But this scorpion, this wicked spirit,
The Sultaness, for all her flattering,
Planned, under cover of this, very mortally to sting.
The Sultan comes himself soon after this
So royally that it is a wonder to tell,
And welcomes her with all joy and bliss.
And thus in mirth and joy I let them remain;
The essential part of this matter is what I tell.
When time came, men thought it for the best
That revel should stint, and people go to their rest.
The time having come, this old Sultaness
Has arranged this feast of which I told,
And to the feast Christian folk go
All together, yes, both young and old.
Here may men behold feasting and royalty,
And dainties more than I can tell you;
But all too dear they paid for it before they rise (from the feast).
O sudden woe, that ever art successor
To worldly bliss, sprinkled with bitterness,
The end of the joy of our worldly labor!
Woe takes over at the end of our gladness.
Hearken to this counsel for thy safety:
Upon thy glad day have in thy mind
The unexpected woe or harm that follows.
For shortly to tell, at one word,
The Sultan and the Christians each one
Are all hacked to pieces and stabbed at the table,
Except for only Lady Custance alone.
This old Sultaness, cursed crone,
Has with her friends done this cursed deed,
For she herself wanted to rule all the country.
Nor there was any Syrian that was converted,
Who knew of the counsel of the Sultan (followed his advice),
Who was not all hacked to pieces before he could escape.
And Custance have they taken right then, immediately, 
And in a ship entirely without a rudder, God knows,
They have set her, and told her to learn to sail
Out of Syria back to Italy.
A certain amount of treasure that she brought there,
And, to say the truth, a great store of provisions
They have given her, and clothes also she had, 
And forth she sails in the salt see.
O my Custance, full of goodness,
O Emperor's young daughter dear,
He that is lord of Fortune be thy rudder!
She blesses herself, and with full pitiful voice
Unto the cross of Christ thus said she:
"O clear, o blessed altar, holy cross,
Red with the blood of the Lamb full of pity,
That washed the world from the old iniquity,
Keep me from the fiend and from his claws,
That day that I shall drown in the deep.
"Victorious tree, protection of true (believers),
That alone was worthy to bear
The King of Heaven with his fresh wounds,
The white Lamb, that hurt was with a spear,
Banisher of fiends out of man and woman
Over which thy limbs faithfully extend,
Guard me, and give me power my life to amend."
Years and days floated this creature
Throughout the Sea of Greece unto the Strait
Of Gibraltar, as it was her lot.
On many a sorry meal now may she feed;
Full often may she expect her death, 
Before the wild waves will drive her
Unto the place where she shall come to land.
Men might ask why she was not slain
Also at the feast? Who could save her body?
And I answer to that question in reply,
Who saved Daniel in the horrible cave
Where every person except for him, master and servant,
Was devoured by the lion before he could escape?
No one but God Whom he bore in his heart.
God wanted to show his wonderful miracle
In her, so that we should see his mighty works;
Christ, Who is a medicine for every harm,
By certain means often, as know clerks,
Does something for a certain reason that is very obscure
To man's understanding, which, because of our ignorance,
Can not know His prudent foresight.
Now since she was not slain at the feast,
Who kept her from the drowning in the sea?
Who kept Jonas in the fish's maw
Until he was spouted up at Nineveh?
Well may men know it was no one but He
Who kept the Hebrew people from their drowning,
With dry feet through the sea passing.  
Who commanded the four spirits of tempest
That have power to harm land and sea,
Both north and south, and also west and east,
"Harm neither sea, nor land, nor tree"?
Truly, the commander of that was He
Who from the tempest always this woman guarded
As well when she woke as when she slept.
Where could this woman have food and drink
Three years and more? How lasts her store of provisions?
Who fed the Egyptian Mary in the cave,
Or in desert? No person but Christ, without doubt.
It was as great marvel five thousand folk
To feed with five loaves and two fish.
God sent his plenty at their great need.
She drives forth into our ocean
Throughout our wild sea, until at the last
Next to a castle that I can not name,
Far in Northumberland the waves cast her,
And in the sand her ship stuck so fast
That thence it would not (move) for the duration of an entire tide;
The will of Christ was that she should remain there.
The constable of the castle down has come
To see this wreck, and all the ship he searched,
And found this weary woman full of care;
He found also the treasure that she brought.
In her language mercy she besought,
The life out of her body to take away,
Her to deliver from the woe that she was in.
A sort of corrupt Latin was her speech,
But nonetheless by means of this she was understood.
The constable, when he desired no longer to search,
This woeful woman he brought to the land.
She kneels down and gives thanks for what God has sent;
But who she was she would tell no man,
For anything, though she should die.
She said she was so bewildered in the sea
That she lost her memory, by her pledged word (she swore).
The constable has for her such great pity,
And also his wife, that they weep for pity.
She was so diligent, without laziness,
To serve and please every one in that place
That all who look in her face love her.
This constable and Lady Hermengild, his wife,
Were pagans, and (so was) that country everywhere;
But Hermengild loved her as much as her life,
And Custance has so long lived there,
In prayers, with many a bitter tear,
Until Jesus has converted through his grace
Dame Hermengild, wife of the constable of that place.
In all that land no Christians dared assemble;
All Christian folk have fled from that country
Because of pagans, that conquered all about
The coastal regions of the north, by land and sea.
To Wales fled the Christian people
Of old Britons dwelling in this isle;
There was their refuge at that time.
But yet Christian Britons were not so (completely) exiled
That there were not some that in their secrecy
Honored Christ and deceived the heathen folk,
And near the castle there dwelt three such (Christians).
The one of them was blind and could not see,
Unless it were with those eyes of his mind
With which men see, after they have become blind.
Bright was the sun in that summer's day,
For which the constable and his wife also
And Custance have taken the direct route
Toward the sea an eighth of a mile or two,
To amuse themselves and to roam to and fro,
And in their walk this blind man they met,
Bent over and old, with eyes fast shut.
"In the name of Christ," cried this blind Briton,
"Dame Hermengild, give me my sight again!"
This lady grew afraid of these words,
Lest that her husband, shortly to say,
Would have slain her for Jesus Christ's love,
Until Custance made her bold, and told her to work
The will of Christ, as daughter of his church.
The constable grew troubled at that sight,
And said, "What does all this business mean?"
Custance answered, "Sir, it is Christ's might,
That helps folk out of the fiend's snare."
And so completely she did our religion explain
That she the constable, before it was evening,
Converts, and made him believe in Christ.
This constable was in no way lord of this place
Of which I speak, where he Custance found,
But kept it securely many a winter's space of time
Under Alla, king of all Northumberland,
Who was full wise, and worthy of his hand (a mighty warrior)
Against the Scots, as men may well hear;
But I will turn again to my subject.
Satan, that ever waits (for a chance) to trick us,
Saw of Custance all her perfection,
And considered right away how he might repay her, 
And made a young knight that dwelt in that town
Love her so passionately, by foul desire,
That truly he thought he should die,
Unless he might once have his will of her.
He woos her, but it avails not;
She would do no sin, in no way.
And for malice he plotted in his mind
To make her in a shameful death to die.
He waits until the constable was away,
And secretly one night he crept
In Hermengild's bedroom, while she slept.
Weary, exhausted because of her prayers,
Sleeps Custance, and Hermengild also.
This knight, through Satan's temptations,
Very quietly has gone to the bed,
And cut the throat of Hermengild in two,
And laid the bloody knife by Lady Custance,
And went his way, may God give him misfortune!
Soon after, this constable comes home again,
And also Alla, who was king of that land,
And saw his wife mercilessly slain,
For which full often he wept and wrung his hands,
And in the bed the bloody knife he found
By Lady Custance. Alas, what could she say?
For sheer woe her wit was all away.
To king Alla was told all this misfortune,
And also the time, and where, and in what manner
That in a ship was found this Custance,
As before this you have heard tell.
The king's heart for pity trembled,
When he saw so good a creature
Fallen in distress and in misfortune.
For as the lamb toward its death is brought,
So stands this innocent before the king.
This false knight, who has this treason wrought,
Falsely testifies that she has done this thing.
But nonetheless, there was great mourning
Among the people, and they say they can not imagine
That she had done so great a wickedness,
For they have seen her always so virtuous,
And loving Hermengild as much as her life.
Of this bore witness every one in that house,
Except for him who slew Hermengild with his knife.
This gentle king was deeply moved
By this witness, and thought he would enquire
Deeper in this, to learn the truth.
Alas! Custance, thou hast no champion,
And fight can thou not, alas!
But He that died for our redemption,
And bound Satan (and he yet lies where he lay),
So be thy strong champion this day!
For, unless Christ a clear miracle reveals,
Without guilt thou shalt be slain immediately.
She set herself down on knees, and thus she said:
"Immortal God, that savedest Susannah
From false blame, and thou, merciful maid,
Mary I mean, daughter to Saint Anne,
Before whose child angels sing Hosanna,
If I be guiltless of this felony,
My succor be, for otherwise I shall dye!"
Have you not seen sometime a pale face,
Among a crowd, of him that has been led
Toward his death, where he got no reprieve,
And such a color in his face has had
Men might know his face that was in trouble
Amongst all the faces in that route?
So stands Custance, and looks around her.
O queens, living in prosperity,
Duchesses, and you ladies each one,
Have some pity on her adversity!
An Emperor's daughter stands alone;
She has no person to whom to lament (plead for help).
O blood royal, that stands in this dreadful state,
Far away are thy friends at thy great need!
This king Alla has such compassion,
Since a noble heart is filled with pity,
That from his eyes ran the water down.
"Now hastily have a book fetched," said he,
"And if this knight will swear how that she
Slew this woman, then will we think carefully about
Whom we desire to be our judge (i.e., bring her to trial)."
A British book, in which were written the gospels,
Was fetched, and on this book he swore at once 
That she was guilty, and in the same moment
A hand struck him upon the neck-boon,
That down he fell at once like a stone,
And both his eyes burst out of his face
In sight of every body in that place.
A voice was heard by everyone there,
And it said, "Thou hast slandered, guiltless,
The daughter of holy church in the presence of the High One (God);
Thus hast thou done, and yet I hold my peace!"
Of this marvel terrified was all the crowd of people;
Like bewildered folk they stood each one,
For fear of vengeance, except for Custance alone.
Great was the fear and also the repentance
Of them that had a wrong suspicion
Of this blessed innocent, Custance;
And because of this miracle, in conclusion,
And by Custance's mediation,
The king -- and many another in that place --
Converted was, thanked be Christ's grace!
This false knight was slain for his untruth
By judgment of Alla immediately;
And yet Custance had for his death great pity.
And after this Jesus, of His mercy,
Made Alla wed full solemnly
This holy maiden, that is so bright and beautiful;
And thus has Christ made Custance a queen.
But who was woeful, if I shall not lie,
Of this wedding but Donegild, and no others,
The king's mother, full of tyranny?
She thought her cursed heart broke in two.
She wished that her son had not done so;
She thought it an insult that he should take
So foreign a creature as his mate.
I do not want of the chaff, nor of the straw,
To make so long a tale as of the grain (the essential part).
Why should I tell of the royalty
At the marriage, or which course goes before;
Who blows in a trumpet or in a horn?
The fruit (the essential part) of every tale is to be told:
They eat, and drink, and dance, and sing, and play.
They go to bed, as it was reasonable and right;
For though wives are full holy things,
They must take in patience at night
Such sorts of necessary acts as are pleasing
To folk that have wedded them with rings,
And (they must) lay their holiness aside a little while,
As for the time being -- it can be no better.
On her he begot a male child quickly,
And to a bishop, and his constable also,
He gave his wife to protect, when he is gone
Toward Scotland, his foemen to seek.
Now fair Custance, who is so humble and meek,
So long is gone with child, until that quietly
She keeps to her chamber, abiding Christ's will.
The time is come a male child she bore;
Mauricius at the baptismal font they call him.
This constable orders a messenger to come forth,
And wrote unto his king, who was called Alla,
How this blissful event has occurred,
And other tidings useful to be said.
He takes the letter, and forth he goes his way.
This messenger, to do (something for) his profit,
Unto the king's mother rides quickly,
And salutes her full fair in his language:
"Madame," said he, "you may be glad and happy,
And thank God a hundred thousand times!
My lady queen has a child, without doubt,
As a joy and bliss to all this reign about.
"Lo, here (are) the letters sealed of this business,
That I must bear with all the haste I can.
If you will (send) anything unto your son the king,
I am at your service, both night and day."
Donegild answered, "Right now, at this time, no;
But here all night I want that thou take thy rest.
Tomorrow will I say to thee what I wish."
This messenger drank heavily ale and wine,
And stolen were his letters secretly
Out of his box, while he slept like a pig;
And counterfeited was full subtly
Another letter, made full sinfully,
Directed unto the king concerning this matter
From his constable, as you shall after hear.
The letter said the queen delivered was
Of so horrible a fiendish creature
That in the castle no one was so bold
That for any length of time dared to remain near it.
The mother was an evil spirit, by chance
Come, by charms or by sorcery,
And every person hates her company.
Woe was this king when he this letter had seen,
But to no person he told his painful sorrows,
But by his own hand he wrote in answer,
"Welcome be the dispensation of Christ for evermore
To me that am now learned in his teaching!
Lord, welcome be thy desire and thy pleasure;
I put all my will in thy governance.
"Guard this child, whether it be foul or fair,
And also my wife, until my home-coming.
Christ, when He pleases, may send me an heir
Moore agreeable than this to my desire."
This letter he seals, secretly weeping,
Which to the messenger was given soon,
And forth he goes; there is nothing more to do.
O messenger, filled with drunkenness,
Strong is thy breath, thy limbs ever tremble,
And thou betray all secrets.
Thy mind is lost, thou chatter like a jay,
Thy face is completely changed. 
Where drunkenness reigns in any group,
There is no secret hidden, without doubt.
O Donegild, I do not have any English suitable (to describe)
Unto thy malice and thy tyranny!
And therefore to the fiend I thee consign;
Let him write about thy treachery!
Fie, like a man, fie! -- o nay, by God, I lie --
Fie, like a fiendish spirit, for I dare well tell,
Though thou here walk, thy spirit is in hell!
This messenger comes from the king again,
And at the king's mother's court he dismounted,
And she was very happy because of this messenger,
And (she) pleased him in all that ever she could.
He drank, and well stuffed (drink) under his belt;
He sleeps, and he snorts in his way
All night, until the sun did arise.
Again were his letters stolen every one,
And counterfeited letters in this manner:
"The king commands his constable at once,
Upon pain of hanging, and of strict judicial punishment,
That he should not allow in any manner
Custance within his realm to remain
Three days and a quarter of duration of a tide (three hours);
"But in the same ship as he her found,
Her, and her young son, and all her gear,
He should put, and push her from the land,
And command her that she never again come here."
O my Custance, well may thy spirit have fear,
And, sleeping, in thy dream to be in suffering,
When Donegild devised all this plan.
This messenger in the morning, when he awoke,
Unto the castle goes the nearest way,
And to the constable he gave the letter;
And when that he this pitiful letter saw,
Full often he said, "Alas and woe!"
"Lord Christ," said he, "how can this world endure,
So full of sin is so many a creature?
"O mighty God, if it be thy will,
Since thou art rightful judge, how may it be
That thou wilt allow innocents to die,
And wicked folk to reign in prosperity?
O good Custance, alas, so woeful am I
That I must be thy tormentor, or die
In a shameful death; there is no other way."
Weep both young and old in all that place
When the king this cursed letter sent,
And Custance, with a deadly pale face,
The fourth day toward her ship she went.
But nonetheless she takes in good faith
The will of Christ, and kneeling on the strand,
She said, "Lord, always welcome be thy dispensation!
"He that me kept from the false blame
While I was on the land amongst you,
He can keep me from harm and also from shame
In the salt sea, although I see not how.
As strong as ever He was, He is yet now.
In Him trust I, and in his mother dear,
Who is to me my sail and also my rudder."
Her little child lay weeping in her arm,
And kneeling, pitifully to him she said,
"Peace, little son, I will do thee no harm."
With that her kerchief off her head she pulled,
And over his little eyes she it laid,
And in her arm she lulls it fast asleep,
And into heaven her eyes up she caste.
"Mother," said she, "and maiden bright, Mary,
True it is that through woman's instigation
Mankind was lost, and damned forever to die,
For which thy child was on a cross stretched.
Thy blissful eyes saw all his torment;
Then is there no comparison between
Thy woe and any woe man may sustain.
"Thou saw thy child slain before thy eyes,
And yet now lives my little child, in faith!
Now, lady bright, to whom all woeful (people) cry,
Thou glory of womanhood, thou fair maiden,
Thou haven of refuge, bright star of day,
Have pity on my child, (thou who) of thy nobility
Takes pity on every wretched person in distress.
"O little child, alas! What is thy guilt,
That never did sin as yet, in faith?
Why will thy hard father have thee killed?
O mercy, dear constable," said she,
"Let my little child remain here with thee;
And if thou dare not save him, for fear of punishment,
Kiss him once in his father's name!"
Therewith she looked backward to the land,
And said, "Farewell, ruthless husband!"
And up she rises, and walks down the strand
Toward the ship -- all the crowd follows her --
And ever she prays her child to hold his peace;
And takes her leave, and with a holy attitude
She blesses herself, and into the ship she went.
Supplied with food was the ship, it is no doubt,
Abundantly for her very long time (of sailing),
And other necessities that should be needed
She had enough -- praised be God's grace!
For wind and weather almighty God provide,
And bring her home! I can no better say,
But in the sea she drives forth on her way.
Alla the king comes home soon after this
Unto his castle, of the which I told,
And asks where his wife and his child is.
The constable began about his heart to grow cold,
And plainly the whole affair he him told
As you have heard -- I can tell it no better --
And shows the king his seal and also his letter,
And said, "Lord, as you commanded me
Upon pain of death, so have I done, certainly."
This messenger tortured was until he
Had to reveal and tell, bluntly and plainly,
From night to night, in what place he had lain;
And thus, by wit and subtle questioning,
Deduced was by whom this harm did spring.
The hand was known that the letter wrote,
And all the venom of this cursed deed,
But in what manner (this was done), certainly, I know not.
The effect is this: that Alla, without doubt,
His mother slew -- that may men plainly read --
Because she traitor was to her allegiance.
Thus ends old Donegild, with bad luck to her!
The sorrow that this Alla night and day
Makes for his wife, and for his child also,
There is no tongue that it can tell.
But now will I go unto Custance,
Who floats in the sea, in pain and woe,
Five years and more, as it pleased Christ's dispensation,
Before her ship approached unto land.
Alongside a heathen castle, at the last,
Of which the name in my text I do not find,
Custance, and also her child, the sea up cast. 
Almighty God, that saves all mankind,
Have for Custance and for her child some thought,
Who fallen is in heathen hand once more,
On the point of dying, as I shall tell you soon.
Down from the castle comes there many a person
To stare on this ship and on Custance.
But shortly, from the castle, on a night,
The lord's steward -- God give him bad luck! --
A thief, that had renounced our religion,
Came into ship alone, and said he should
Her lover be, whether she would or would not.
Woebegone then was this wretched woman;
Her child cried, and she cried pitifully.
But blissful Mary helped her right then;
For with her struggling well and mightily
The thief fell over board all suddenly,
And in the sea he drowned as a punishment;
And thus has Christ kept Custance undefiled.
O foul lust of lechery, lo, thy end!
Not only that thou make man's mind grow faint,
But truly thou wilt his body destroy.
The end of thy work, or of thy blind desires,
Is lamentation. How many a one may men find
That not for the deed sometimes, but for the intention
To do this sin, are either slain or destroyed!
How may this weak woman have this strength
Herself to defend against this renegade?
O Goliath, immeasurable of height,
How could David make thee so defeated,
So young and so lacking in arms and armor?
How dared he look upon thy dreadful face?
Well may men see, it was nothing but God's grace.
Who gave Judith courage or hardiness
To slay that Holofernes in his tent,
And to deliver out of wretchedness
The people of God? I say, for this purpose,
That just as God the spirit of vigor sent
To them and saved them out of misfortune,
So sent he might and vigor to Custance.
Forth goes her ship throughout the narrow mouth
Of Gibraltar and Morocco, driving ever
Sometimes west, and sometimes north and south,
And sometimes east, full many a weary day,
Until Christ's mother -- blessed be she always! --
Has devised a plan, through her endless goodness,
To make an end of all her sadness.
Now let us stint of Custance but a short while,
And speak we of the Roman Emperor,
That out of Syria has by letters known
The slaughter of Christian folk, and dishonor
Done to his daughter by a false traitor,
I mean the cursed wicked Sultaness
That at the feast caused to be slain both high ranking and low.
For which this Emperor has sent at once
His senator, with royal armaments,
And other lords, God knows, many a one,
On Syrians to take great vengeance.
They burn, slay, and bring them to misery
Full many a day; but shortly -- this is the end --
Homeward to Rome they prepared themselves to wend.
This senator goes with victory
Toward Rome, sailing full royally,
And met the ship sailing, as says the story,
In which Custance sits full piteously.
In no way knew he who she was, nor why
She was in such a state, she will not tell
Of her rank, although she should die.
He brings her to Rome, and to his wife
He gave her, and her young son also;
And with the senator she led her life.
Thus can Our Lady bring out of woe
Woeful Custance, and many another more.
And long time dwelled she in that place,
In holy works ever, as was her special gift of God.
The senator's wife was her aunt,
But for all that she knew her never the more.
I will no longer tarry in this case,
But to king Alla, whom I spoke of formerly,
Who for his wife weeps and sighs sore,
I will return, and I will leave Custance
Under the senator's governance.
King Alla, who had his mother slain,
Upon a day fell in such repentance
That, if I shortly tell shall and plainly,
To Rome he comes to receive his penance;
And put him in the Pope's governance
In all things, and Jesus Christ besought
To forgive his wicked deeds that he did.
The news at once through Rome town is carried,
How Alla king shall come in pilgrimage,
By arrangers of lodging that went before him;
For which the senator, as was the custom,
Rode to meet him, and many of his lineage,
As well to show his high magnificence
As to do any king a reverence.
Great friendliness shows this noble senator
To king Alla, and he to him also;
Every one of them does the other great honor.
And so it happened that in a day or two
This senator is to king Alla gone
To feast, and shortly, if I shall not lie,
Custance's son went in his company.
Some men would say at request of Custance
This senator has led this child to the feast;
I can not tell every detail --
Be as be may, there he was at the least.
But the truth is this, that at his mother's command
Before Alla, during the meal time,
The child stood, looking in the king's face.
This king Alla has of this child great wonder,
And to the senator he said at once,
"Whose is that fair child that stands yonder?"
"I do not know," said he, "by God, and by Saint John!
A mother he has, but father has he none
That I know of" -- and shortly, in a little while,
He told Alla how this child was found.
"But God knows," said this senator also,
"So virtuous a liver in my life
Saw I never as she, nor heard of more,
Of worldly women, maiden, nor of wife.
I dare well say she had rather have a knife
Through her breast, than be a woman wicked;
There is no man could bring her to that point."
Now was this child as like unto Custance
As it is possible for a creature to be.
This Alla has the face in remembrance
Of Lady Custance, and thereon mused he
If the child's mother were in any way she
Who is his wife, and secretly he sighed,
And sped himself from the table as fast as he could.
"In faith," thought he, "hallucination is in my head!
I ought to believe, by reasonable judgment,
That in the salt sea my wife is dead."
And afterward he made his contrary argument:
"What know I if Christ has hither sent
My wife by sea, as well as he her sent
To my country from thence that she went?"
And after noon, home with the senator
Goes Alla, to see this wonderful happening.
This senator does Alla great honor,
And hastily he sent after Custance.
But trust well, she did not want to dance
When she knew the reason for that summons;
Hardly upon her feet she could stand.
When Alla saw his wife, gently he greeted her,
And wept that it was a pity to see;
For at the first look he on her set
He knew well indeed that it was she.
And she, for sorrow, stands as dumb as a tree,
So was her heart shut (pressed by emotion) in her distress,
When she remembered his unnatural cruelty.
Twice she swooned in his own sight;
He wept, and himself excuses piteously.
"Now God," said he, "and his saints bright
As surely as they may have mercy on my soul,
(I swear) that of your harm I am as guiltless
As is Maurice my son, whose face is so like yours;
Otherwise (may) the fiend me fetch out of this place!"
Long was the sobbing and the bitter pain,
Before their woeful hearts might cease (giving pain);
Great was the pity to hear them lament,
Through which lamentations began their woe to increase.
I pray you to release me from all my labor;
I can not tell their woe until to-morrow,
I am so weary from speaking of sorrow.
But finally, when the truth is known
That Alla was guiltless of her woe,
I believe a hundred times they have kissed,
And such a bliss is there between them two
That, except for the joy that lasts evermore,
There is none like it that any creature
Has seen or shall (see), while the world may endure.
Then prayed she her husband meekly,
In relief of her long, pitiful pain,
That he would pray her father specially
That of his majesty he would incline
To grant some day with him to dine.
She prayed him also he should by no means
Unto her father say any word of her.
Some men would say that the child Maurice
Takes this message unto this Emperor;
But, as I guess, Alla was not so foolish
To him that was of such high honor
As he that is of Christian folk the flower,
To have sent any child, but it is better to believe
He went himself, and that would be most fitting.
This Emperor has agreed nobly
To come to dinner, as he him requested;
And well read I (in my source) he looked intently
Upon this child, and thought about his daughter.
Alla goes to his inn, and as he should,
Prepared for this feast in every way
So far as his ability may suffice.
The morning came, and Alla began to prepare himself,
And also his wife, to meet this Emperor;
And forth they ride in joy and in gladness.
And when she saw her father in the street,
She dismounted, and falls to his feet.
"Father," said she, "your young child Custance
Is now completely out of your remembrance.
"I am your daughter Custance," said she,
"Whom long ago you have sent unto Syria.
It am I, father, that in the salt sea
Was put alone and damned to die.
Now, good father, mercy I beg of you!
Send me no more unto any heathen country,
But thank my lord here of his kindnesses."
Who can tell all the pitiful joy 
Between them three, since they are thus met?
But of my tale I shall make an end;
The day goes fast, I will no longer delay.
This glad folk to dinner they themselves set;
In joy and bliss at their meal I let them remain
A thousand fold well more (blissful) than I can tell.
This child Maurice was later Emperor
Made by the Pope, and lived in a Christian manner;
To Christ's church he did great honor.
But I let all his story pass by;
Of Custance is my tale in particular.
In the old Roman histories may men find
Maurice's life; I bear it not in mind.
This king Alla, when he his time saw,
With his Custance, his holy wife so sweet,
To England are they come by the direct route,
Where they live in joy and in quiet.
But little while it lasts, I you promise,
Joy of this world, because time will not stand still;
From day to night it changes like the tide.
Who lived ever in such delight one day
That he was not moved by either conscience,
Or anger, or desire, or some kind of fear,
Envy, or pride, or passion, or offence?
I make this statement only for this conclusion,
That little while in joy or in pleasure
Lasts the bliss of Alla with Custance.
For Death, that takes of high ranking and low his payment,
When passed was a year, as I suppose,
Out of this world this king Alla he seized,
For whom Custance has full great sadness.
Now let us pray God his soul be blessed!
And Lady Custance, finally to say,
Toward the town of Rome goes her way.
To Rome has come this holy creature,
And finds her friends whole and sound;
Now has she escaped all her adventure.
And when she her father has found,
Down on her knees falls she to ground;
Weeping for tenderness blithe in heart,
She praises God a hundred thousand times.
In virtue and in holy charitable works
They all live, and never parted;
Until death departs them, this life they lead.
And fare now well! my tale is at an end.
Now Jesus Christ, that of his might may send
Joy after woe, govern us in his grace,
And keep us all that are in this place! Amen
[Our Host upon his stirrups stood up at once,
And said, "Good men, listen every one!
This was a excellent tale for this occasion!
Sir Parish Priest," said he, "for God's bones,
Tell us a tale, as was thy previous agreement.
I see well that you men learned in lore
Know much that is good, by God's dignity!"
The Parson him answered, "Bless me!
What ails the man, so sinfully to swear?"
Our Host answered, "O Jankin, are you there?
I smell a Lollard in the wind," said he.
"Now! good men," said our Host, "listen to me;
Wait, for God's worthy passion,
For we shall have a sermon;
This Lollard here will preach us something."
"Nay, by my father's soul, that shall he not!"
Said the Shipman, "Here shall he not preach;
He shall no gospel interpret here nor teach.
We all believe in the great God," said he;
"He would sow some difficulty,
Or sprinkle weeds in our clean grain.
And therefore, Host, I warn thee beforehand,
My handsome body shall tell a tale,
And I shall clink you so merry a bell,
That I shall awaken all this company.
But it shall not be of philosophy,
Nor legal cases, nor elaborate terms of law.
There is but little Latin in my maw!"]
There is, at the west side of Italy,
Down at the foot of Vesulus the cold,
A lusty plain, abundant with food crops,
Where many a tower and town thou may behold,
That were founded in time of fathers old,
And many another delectable sight,
And Saluces this noble country is called.
A marquis once was lord of that land,
As were his worthy elders before him;
And obedient, ever ready to his hand (to do his commands),
Were all his subjects, both lesser ranks and nobles.
Thus in delight he lives, and has done since long before,
Beloved and feared, through favor of Fortune,
Both by his lords and by his citizenry.
Moreover he was, to speak of lineage,
The most noble born in Lombardy,
A handsome person, and strong, and young of age,
And full of honor and of courtesy;
Discreet enough to govern his country,
Except in some things he was to blame;
And Walter was this young lord's name.
I blame him thus: that he considered not
In time coming what might happen to him,
But on his immediate pleasure was all his thought,
Such as to hawk and hunt on every side.
Well nigh all other cares he let slip away,
And also he would not -- and that was worst of all --
Wed any woman, for anything that may befall.
Only that point his people took so badly
That in groups on one day they went to him,
And one of them, that wisest was in learning --
Or else the one that the lord most readily would consent
That he should tell him what his people meant,
Or else he knew well how to present such a matter --
He to the marquis said as you shall hear:
"O noble marquis, your graciousness
Makes us confident and gives us boldness,
As often as it is time (to do so) by necessity,
That we to you may tell our sorrow.
Grant, lord, now of your nobility
That we with pitiful heart may unto you complain,
And let your ears not disdain (to hear) my voice.
"Although I have nothing to do in this matter
More than another man has in this place,
Yet for as much as you, my lord so dear,
Have always shown me favor and grace
I dare the more confidently to ask of you a time
Of hearing to present our request,
And you, my lord, to do right as it may please you.
"For certainly, lord, so well you please us 
And all your actions, and ever have done so, that we
Could not ourselves imagine how
We might live in more happiness,
Save one thing, lord, if it be your will,
That you would desire to be a wedded man;
Then your people would be in complete peace of mind.
"Bow your neck under that blissful yoke
Of sovereignty, not of servitude,
Which men call marriage or wedlock;
And think, lord, among your wise thoughts 
How our days pass in various ways,
For though we sleep, or wake, or roam, or ride,
Ever flees the time; it will wait for no man.
"And though your green youth flowers as yet,
In creeps age always, as still as stone,
And death menaces every age, and smites
In each rank, for there escapes no one;
And just as certainly as we know, each one of us,
That we shall die, as uncertain we all
Are of that day when death shall on us fall.
"Accept then the true intent of us,
Who never yet refused your command,
And we will, lord, if you will assent,
Chose a wife for you, in short time at the least,
Born of the most noble and of the greatest (in rank)
Of all this land, so that it must seem
Honor to God and you, so far as we can judge.
"Deliver us out of all this constant fear,
And take a wife, for high God's sake!
For if it so happen, may God forbid,
That through your death your line should die out,
And that a foreign successor should take
Your heritage, O woe would it be to us in our lifetime!
Wherefore we pray you hastily to take a wife."
Their meek prayer and their pitiful manner
Made the marquis's heart have pity.
"You want," said he, "my own people dear,
That which I never before thought to compel myself.
I rejoiced in my liberty,
That seldom is found in marriage;
Where I was free, I must be in servitude.
"But nevertheless I see your true intent,
And trust upon your intelligence, and always have done so;
Therefore of my free will I will assent
To wed, as soon as ever I can.
But insofar as you have offered me to-day
To choose me a wife, I release you 
(From making) that choice and pray you to cease (making) that offer.
"For God knows it, that children often are
Unlike their worthy elders (who came) before them;
All goodness comes from God, not from the lineage
By which they are conceived and born.
I trust in God's goodness, and therefore
My marriage and my estate and peace of mind 
I entrust to him; he may do as he pleases.
"Let me alone in the choosing of my wife --
That responsibility upon my back I will endure.
But I you pray, and order you upon your life,
Whatever wife I take, you me assure
To honor her, while her life may endure,
In word and deed, both here and everywhere,
As if she were an emperor's daughter.
"And furthermore, this shall you swear: that you
Against my choice shall neither grouch nor strive;
For since I must forgo my liberty
At your request, as ever I may thrive,
Where my heart is set, there will I take a wife;
And unless you will assent in such a manner,
I pray you, speak no more of this matter."
With heartfelt will they swore and assent
To all this thing -- there said no person nay --
Beseeching him of grace, before they went,
That he would grant them a fixed day
Of his wedding, as soon as ever he can;
For yet always the people somewhat dreaded,
Lest the marquis no wife would wed.
He granted them a day, such as he pleased,
On which he would be wedded surely,
And said he did all this at their request.
And they, with humble good will, obediently,
Kneeling upon their knees full reverently,
All thanked him; and thus they have a conclusion
In accord with their wishes, and home again they go.
And thereupon he to his officers
Commands the feast to prepare,
And to his household knights and squires
Gave such orders as he desired to lay on them;
And they to his commandment obey,
And each of them does all his efforts
To lend honor unto the feast.
Not far from that same noble palace,
Where this marquis planned his marriage,
There stood a small village, in a delightful location,
In which poor folk of that village
Had their beasts and their dwellings
And of their labor took their sustenance,
According to what produce the earth gave them.
Among these poor folk there dwelt a man
Who was considered poorest of them all;
But high God sometimes can send 
His grace into a little ox's stall;
Janicula men of that village call him.
A daughter had he, fair enough in appearance,
And Griselda this young maiden was called.
But to speak of virtuous beauty,
Then was she the fairest of all under sun;
Because she was raised in poverty,
No sensual desire had run through her heart.
Much more often of the well than of the wine barrel
She drank, and because she would satisfy the demands of virtue
She knew well labor but no idle ease.
But though this maid was tender of age,
Yet in the breast of her virginity
There was enclosed a mature and steadfast spirit;
And in great reverence and charity
Her old poor father she cared for.
A few sheep, while spinning, on field she kept;
She would not be idle until she slept.
And when she homeward came, she would bring
Cabbages or other greens very often,
Which she shredded and boiled for their sustenance
And made her bed full hard and not at all soft;
And ever she sustained her father's life
With every obedience and diligence
That child may do to father's reverence.
Upon Griselda, this poor creature,
Very many times this marquis set his eye
By chance, as he on hunting rode;
And when it happened that he might see her,
He not with lecherous looking of folly
His eyes cast on hire, but in serious manner
Upon her demeanor he would often think,
Commending in his heart her womanly qualities,
And also her virtue, passing any person
Of so young age, as well in manner as deed.
For though the people have no great insight
In virtue, he considered very carefully
Her goodness, and decided that he would
Wed her only, if ever he should wed.
The day of wedding came, but no person can
Tell what woman it should be;
For which marvel wondered many a man,
And said, when they were in private,
"Will not our lord yet leave his vanity?
Will he not wed? Alas! Alas, the times!
Why will he thus himself and us deceive?"
But nevertheless this marquis has made
Of gems, set in gold and in azure,
Brooches and rings, for Griselda's sake;
And of her clothing he took the measure
By a maid like her (in) stature,
And also of all other ornaments
That unto such a wedding should be appropriate.
The time of mid-morning of the same day
Approaches, when this wedding should be,
And all the palace was put in proper order,
Both hall and chambers, each in its turn;
Storage buildings stuffed with plenty,
There canst thou see, of delicious foods
What can be found from as far as farthest Italy.
This royal marquis, richly arrayed,
Lords and ladies in his company,
Who were invited to the feast, 
And of his retinue the knights,
With many a sound of varied melody,
Unto the village of which I told
In this splendid array the direct route have held.
Griselda of this, God knows, full ignorant,
That for her was all this splendour prepared,
Has gone to fetch water at a well,
And comes home as soon as ever she can;
For well she had heard said that same day
The marquis should wed, and if she could,
She would be happy to have seen some of that sight.
She thought, "I will stand with other maidens,
Who are my fellows, in our door and see
The marchioness, and therefore will I try
To do at home, as soon as it can be,
The chores that I must do,
And then I may at leisure her behold,
If she takes this way to the castle."
And as she would over her threshold go,
The marquis came and called her;
And she set down her water pot quickly,
Beside the threshold, in an ox's stall,
And down upon her knees she fell,
And with sober countenance kneels without speaking,
Until she had heard what was the lord's will.
This pensive marquis spoke unto this maid
Full soberly, and said in this manner:
"Where is your father, O Griselda?" he said.
And she with reverence, in humble manner,
Answered, "Lord, he is right here."
And in she goes without longer delay,
And to the marquis she fetched her father.
He by the hand then took this old man,
And said thus, when he had him aside:
"Janicula, I neither may nor can
Longer hide the desire of my heart.
If thou agree, whatsoever may happen,
Thy daughter will I take, before I depart,
For my wife, until her life's end.
"Thou lovest me, I know it well for certain,
And art my faithful liege man born,
And all that pleases me, I dare well say
It pleases thee, and specially therefore
Tell me of that question that I have stated previously,
If thou will agree with that proposal,
To take me for thy son-in-law."
This sudden occurrence this man so astounded 
That he grew red; abashed and all trembling
He stood; hardly said he any more words,
But only thus: "Lord," said he, "my desire
Is as you wish, and against your pleasure
I will do nothing, you are my lord so dear;
Right as you please, govern this matter."
"Yet I want," said this marquis softly,
"That in thy chamber I and thou and she
Have a discussion, and knowest thou why?
For I will ask if it be her will 
To be my wife and conduct herself as I decide.
And all this shall be done in thy presence;
I will say nothing out of thy hearing."
And in the chamber, while they were engaged in
Their negotiation, which you shall after hear,
The people came unto outside the house,
And wondered in what a virtuous manner
And how attentively she cared for her dear father.
But certainly Griselda might wonder,
For never before saw she such a sight.
Though it is no wonder that she was astonished
To see so great a guest come in that place;
She never was accustomed to such guests,
For which she looked full pale in her face.
But shortly forth this matter to pursue,
These are the words that the marquis said
To this benign, true, faithful maid:
"Griselda," he said, "you shall well understand
It is pleasing to your father and to me
That I you wed, and also it may so stand,
As I suppose, that you desire that it so be.
But these questions ask I first," said he,
"That, since it shall be done in a hasty manner,
Will you assent, or else think it over?
"I say this: are you ready (to submit) with good heart
To all my desires, and that I freely may,
As seems best to me, make you laugh or feel pain,
And you never to grouch about it, at any time?
And also when I say `yes,' say not `nay,'
Neither by word nor frowning countenance?
Swear this, and here I swear our alliance."
Wondering upon these words, trembling for fear,
She said, "Lord, unsuitable and unworthy
Am I of that same honor that you offer me,
But as you desire yourself, right so desire I.
And here I swear that never willingly,
In deed nor thought, will I disobey you,
Even to be dead, though I would hate to die."
"This is enough, Griselda mine," said he.
And forth he goes with a full sober manner
Out of the door, and after that came she,
And to the people he said in this manner:
"This is my wife," said he, "that stands here.
Honor her and love her, I pray,
Whoever loves me; there is no more to say."
And so that nothing of her old belongings
She should bring into his house, he ordered
That women should undress her right there;
Of which these ladies were not very happy
To handle her clothes, in which she was clad.
But nevertheless, this maid bright of hue
From foot to head they have clothed all new.
Her hair have they combed, that lay unkempt
Very crudely, and with their elegant fingers
A crown on her head they have placed,
And set her garments full of jeweled ornaments of every sort.
Of her appearance why should I make a long tale?
The hardly people knew her for her beauty
When she was translated into such riches.
This marquis has espoused her with a ring
Brought for the same purpose, and then set her 
Upon a horse, snow-white and with a gentle pace,
And to his palace, before he longer delayed,
With joyful people that led and met her,
Conducted her; and thus the day they spend
In revel, until the sun descended.
And shortly forth this tale to pursue,
I say that to this new marchioness 
God has such favor sent her of his grace
That it seemed not likely
That she was born and fed in humble circumstances,
In a peasant's hut or in an ox-stall,
But nurtured in an emperor's hall.
To every person she is grown so dear
And worshipful that folk where she was born,
And from her birth knew her year by year,
They hardly believed -- but dared have sworn --
That to Janicle, of whom I spoke before,
She was daughter, for, by conjecture,
They thought she was another creature.
For though that she was always virtuous,
She was increased in such excellence
Of good characteristics, set in high goodness,
And so discreet and fair of eloquence,
So benign and so worthy of reverence,
And could so the people's heart embrace,
That each who looked on her face loved her.
Not only in the town of Saluces 
Was made known the praise of her name,
But also moreover in many a region,
If one said well, another said the same;
So spread the fame of her high goodness 
That men and women, as well young as old,
Go to Saluce to look upon her.
Thus Walter lowly -- nay, but royally --
Wedded with beneficial virtue,
In God's peace lives full easily
At home, and to all appearances he had sufficient happiness;
And because he saw that under low social rank
Was often virtue hid, the people considered him
A prudent man, and that is seen full seldom.
Not only this Griselda through her wit
Knew all the skills of a housewife's duties,
But also, when the situation required it,
The public good could she promote.
There was no discord, rancor, nor sadness 
In all that land that she could not alleviate,
And wisely bring them all in rest and ease.
Though her husband was absent at the time,
If noble men or others of her country
Were wroth, she would bring them to agreement;
Such wise and well considered words had she,
And judgments of such great justice,
That she was sent from heaven, as men supposed,
People to save and every wrong to amend.
Not long time after this Griselda
Was married, she has borne a daughter,
Although she would rather have given birth to a male child;
Glad was this marquis and the folk for this,
For though a maid child came all before,
She may unto a male child attain
By likelihood, since she is not barren.
There happened, as it befalls many times,
When this child had suckled but a short time,
This marquis in his heart longs so
To test his wife, her constancy to know,
That he could not out of his heart throw
This strange desire to test his wife;
Needless, God knows, he intended to frighten her.
He had tested her enough before,
And found her always good; why was it needed
To test her, and always more and more,
Though some men praise its ingenuity?
But as for me, I say that it ill befits one
To test a wife when there is no need,
And put her in anguish and in dread.
For which this marquis worked in this manner:
He came alone at night, where she lay,
With stern face and with a very troubled manner,
And said thus: "Griselda," said he, "that day
That I took you out of your impoverished situation,
And put you in the condition of high nobility --
You have not forgotten that, as I suppose?
"I say, Griselda, this present high social position,
In which I have put you, as I believe,
Requires that you be not forgetful 
That I took you in a poor, very humble condition,
Despite any present prosperity you must know it yourself. 
Take heed of every word that I say to you;
There is no person that hears it but we two.
"You know well yourself how you came here
Into this house, it is not long ago;
And though to me you are beloved and dear,
Unto my nobles you are not at all so.
They say, to them it is great shame and woe
To be subjects and be in servitude
To thee, that art born in a humble village.
"And especially since thy daughter was born
These words have they spoken, doubtless.
But I desire, as I have done before,
To live my life with them in rest and peace.
I can not be imprudent in this case;
I must do with thy daughter for the best,
Not as I would want, but as my people desire.
"And yet, God knows, this is full hateful to me;
But nevertheless without your knowledge
I will not do anything; but this I desire," said he,
"That you assent to me in this matter.
Show now in your actions your patience, 
That you promised me and swore in your village
That day that our marriage was made."
When she had heard all this, she changed not 
Neither in word, nor manner, nor countenance,
For, as it seemed, she was not aggrieved.
She said, "Lord, all is subject to your pleasure.
My child and I, with heart-felt obedience,
Are entirely yours, and you may save or kill
Your own thing; do as you will.
"There can nothing, as God my soul may save,
Please you that may displease me;
Nor do I desire to have anything,
Nor dread to lose, save only you.
This will is in my heart, and ever shall be;
No length of time or death can obliterate this,
Nor change my heart to another place."
Glad was this marquis of her answer,
But yet he feigned as if he were not so;
All sorrowful was his manner and his look,
When he had to go out of the chamber.
Soon after this, in a few minutes,
He privately has told all his plan
Unto a man, and sent him to his wife.
A sort of sergeant (policeman) was this confidential servant,
Whom he had often found faithful 
In important matters, and also such folk well can
Carry out their orders in evil matters.
The lord knew well that he loved and dreaded him;
And when this sergeant knew his lord's will,
Into the chamber he stalked very quietly.
"Madame," he said, "you must forgive it me,
Though I do a thing to which I am constrained.
You are so wise that full well you know
That lords' commands may not be evaded (by feigning);
They may well be bewailed or complained of,
But men must by necessity unto their desires obey,
And so will I; there is no more to say.
"This child I am commanded to take" --
And spoke no more, but out the child he seized
Mercilessly, and made a face
As if he would have slain it before he went.
Griselda must suffer all and consent to all,
And as a lamb she sits meek and still,
And let this cruel sergeant do his will.
Suspicious was the bad reputation of this man,
Suspect his face, suspect his word also;
Suspect the time in which he this began.
Alas! Her daughter that she loved so,
She thought he would have slain it right then.
But nevertheless she neither wept nor sighed,
Conforming herself to what the marquis pleased.
But at the last she began to speak,
And meekly she to the sergeant prayed,
As he was a worthy gentle man,
That she might kiss her child before it died.
And in her lap this little child she laid
With full sad face, and blessed the child,
And lulled it, and afterward kissed it.
And thus she said in her benign voice,
"Farewell my child! I shall thee never see.
But since I have marked thee with the cross
Of that same Father -- blessed may he be! --
That for us died upon a cross of wood,
Thy soul, little child, I entrust to him,
For this night shalt thou die for my sake."
I believe that to a nurse in this case
It would have been hard this pitiful situation to see;
Well might a mother then have cried "alas!"
But nevertheless so firmly steadfast was she
That she endured all adversity,
And to the sergeant meekly she said,
"Have here again your little young maid.
"Go now," said she, "and do my lord's command;
But one thing will I pray you of your grace,
That, unless my lord forbad you, at the least
Bury this little body in some place
That no beasts nor birds tear it to pieces."
But he no word will say to that proposal,
But took the child and went upon his way.
This sergeant came unto his lord again,
And of Griselda's words and her manner
He told him in detail, in short and plain (words),
And presents him with his daughter dear.
Somewhat this lord had pity in his manner,
But nevertheless his purpose held he still,
As lords do, when they will have their will;
And commanded this sergeant that he secretly
Should this child softly wind and wrap (in a blanket),
With every care tenderly,
And carry it in a box or in a folded cloth;
But, upon pain of having his head cut off,
No man should know of his intention,
Nor whence he came, nor whither he went;
But at Bologna to his sister dear,
Who at that very time was countess of Panik,
He should take it and explain to her this matter,
Beseeching her to do her best
This child to nurture in all noble manners;
And whose child that it was he commanded her to hide
From every person, for anything that may happen.
The sergeant goes, and has fulfilled this order;
But to this marquis we now return.
For now he goes very intently considering
If by his wife's appearance he might see,
Or by her word perceive, if she
Were changed; but he never could find her 
Anything but always the same, alike steadfast and kind.
As glad, as humble, as diligent in service,
And also in love, as she was accustomed to be,
Was she to him in every sort of way;
Nor of her daughter not a word spoke she.
No external sign, for any adversity,
Was seen in her, and never her daughter's name
Mentioned she, in earnest nor in jest (in any way).
In this condition there are passed four years
Before she was with child, but, as God would,
A male child she bore by this Walter,
Very gracious and beautiful in appearance.
And when folk told it to his father,
Not only he but all his country merry
Was for this child, and God they thank and praise.
When it was two years old, and from the breast
Of his nurse weaned, on one day
This marquis caught yet another desire
To test his wife yet again, if he can.
O needless was she put to the test!
But wedded men know no moderation,
When they find a patient creature.
"Wife," said this marquis, "you have heard before this
My people are unhappy with our marriage;
And especially since my son is born,
Now is it worse than ever in all our lives.
The grumbling slays my heart and my feelings,
For to my ears comes the voice so sharply
That it well nigh has destroyed my heart.
"Now say they thus: `When Walter is gone,
Then shall the blood of Janicle succeed
And be our lord, for we have no other.'
Such words say my people, no doubt.
Well ought I of such grumbling take heed,
For certainly I dread such opinion,
Though they speak not plainly in my hearing.
"I would live in peace, if I could; 
Therefore I am firmly resolved, 
As I dealt with his sister by night,
Right so I intend to deal with him secretly.
This I warn you, so that you not suddenly
For any woe should break out in a passion;
Be patient, and for that I pray you."
"I have," said she, "said thus, and ever shall:
I want nothing, nor will not want any thing, certainly,
But as you desire. It does not grieve me at all,
Though my daughter and my son be slain --
At your commandment, this is to say.
I have not had any part of children two
But first sickness, and after, woe and pain.
"You are our lord; do with your own thing
Right as you desire; ask no advice from me.
For as I left at home all my clothing,
When I first came to you, right so," said she,
"Left I my will and all my liberty,
And took your clothing; wherefore I you pray,
Do your pleasure; I will obey your desire.
"And certainly, if I had foreknowledge
To know your will, before you told me your desire,
I would do it without negligence;
But now I know your desire, and what you want,
All your pleasure (whatever you wish) firm and stable I hold;
For if I knew that my death would do you ease,
Right gladly would I die, to please you.
"Death can not make any comparison (is nothing compared)
Unto your love." And when this marquis saw
The constancy of his wife, he cast down
His eyes two, and wonders that she can
In patience suffer all this treatment;
And forth he goes with sorrowful countenance,
But to his heart it was full great pleasure.
This ugly sergeant, in the same manner
That he her daughter seized, right so he --
Or worse, if one can worse imagine --
Has seized her son, that was full of beauty.
And continually so patient was she
That she made no appearance of sadness,
But kissed her son, and afterwards it blessed;
Save this, she prayed him that, if he could,
Her little son he would bury in earth
His tender limbs, pleasing in appearance,
From birds and from beasts to save.
But she no answer of him might have.
He went his way, as if he cared nothing about it,
But to Bologna he tenderly brought it.
This marquis wondered, more and more,
Upon her patience, and if he
Had not truly known before this
That she perfectly loved her children,
He would have supposed that by some trickery,
And out of malice, or for hard heart,
That she had suffered this with calm manner.
But well he knew that next to himself, certainly,
She loved her children best in every way.
But now I would like to ask of women 
If these tests might not suffice?
What could a cruel husband more devise
To test her wifehood and her steadfastness,
And he continuing ever in cruelty?
But there are folk of such disposition
That when they have a certain purpose taken,
They can not refrain from their intention,
But, right as if they were bound to that stake,
They will not from that original plan desist.
Right so this marquis has firmly decided
To test his wife as he was first disposed.
He watches to see if by word or countenance
That she to him was changed in heart,
But never could he find variation.
She was always the same in heart and in visage,
And ever the further that she was in age,
The more true, if it were possible,
She was to him in love, and more attentive.
For which it seemed thus: that of them two
There was but one will, for as Walter desired,
The same desire was her pleasure also.
And, God be thanked, all fell for the best.
She proved good; for no worldly discomfort
A wife, concerning herself, nothing should
Desire in fact, except what her husband would want.
The ill fame of Walter spread often and wide,
That of a cruel heart he wickedly,
Because he had wedded a poor woman,
Has murdered both his children secretly.
Such grumbling was among them unanimously.
No wonder is, for to the people's ear
There came no word but that they were murdered.
For which, whereas his people before this
Had loved him well, the disgrace of his bad reputation
Made them so that they hated him for this.
To be a murderer is (to have) a hateful reputation;
But nevertheless, not for any reason,
Would he of his cruel purpose desist;
To test his wife was set all his intention.
When his daughter was twelve years of age,
He to the court of Rome, (which was) in a cunning manner
Informed of his real purpose, sent his messenger,
Commanding them such papal bulls to devise
As to his cruel purpose may suffice --
How the pope, to restore tranquility for his people,
Commanded him to wed another, if he pleased.
I say, he commanded they should counterfeit
The pope's bulls, making mention
That he has permission to leave his first wife,
As by the pope's dispensation,
To stint rancor and dissension
Between his people and him; thus said the bull,
Which they have published widely.
The ignorant people, as it no wonder is,
Supposed full well that it had been right so;
But when these tidings came to Griselda,
I believe that her heart was very woeful.
But she, continuously steadfast for evermore,
Disposed was, this humble creature,
To endure all the adversity of Fortune,
Enduring ever his desire and his pleasure,
To whom she was given, heart and all,
As her true worldly source of satisfaction.
But shortly if this story I tell shall,
This marquis written has in detail
A letter, in which he reveals his intention,
And secretly he sent it to Bologna.
To the Earl of Panyk, who had then
Wedded his sister, prayed he specifically
To bring home again his two children
In a noble public display.
But one thing he him prayed earnestly,
That he to no one, though men would inquire,
Should tell whose children they were,
But say the maiden should wedded be
Unto the Marquis of Saluce immediately.
And as this earl was asked, so did he;
For at the set day he on his way is gone
Toward Saluce, and lords many a one
In rich array, this maiden to guide,
Her young brother riding beside her.
Adorned was in preparation for her marriage
This lovely maid, (her clothing) full of bright gems;
Her brother, who was seven years of age,
Adorned also full handsomely in his manner.
And thus in great nobility and with a glad manner,
Toward Saluces directing their journey,
From day to day they ride on their way.
Meanwhile, in accord with his wicked usage,
This marquis, yet his wife to test more
To the utmost test of her heart,
Fully to have experience and knowledge
If she were as steadfast as before,
He on a certain day in the hearing of all
Full rudely has said to her this speech:
"Certainly, Griselda, I had enough pleasure
To have you as my wife for your goodness,
As for your truth and for your obedience
Not for your lineage, nor for your riches;
But now know I in true certainty
That in great lordship, if I judge rightly,
There is great servitude in various ways.
"I can not do as every plowman may.
My people constrain me to take
Another wife, and complain day by day;
And also the pope, to quench rancor, 
Consents to it -- that dare I assert --
And truly thus much I will say to you:
My new wife is coming by the way.
"Be strong of heart, and vacate her place immediately;
And that dowry that you brought me,
Take it back; I grant it of my grace.
Return to your father's house," said he;
"No one can always have prosperity.
With tranquil heart I advise you to endure
The stroke of Fortune or of chance."
And she in reply answered in patience:
"My lord," said she, "I know, and knew always,
How between your magnificence
And my poverty no person can nor may
Make comparison; it cannot be denied.
I considered myself never worthy in any way
To be your wife, no, nor your chambermaid.
"And in this house, where you made me the lady --
The high God I take for my witness,
And as surely as he my soul may gladden --
I never considered myself lady nor mistress,
But humble servant to your worthiness,
And ever shall, while my life may endure,
Above every worldly creature.
"That you so long of your benignity
Have maintained me in honor and nobility,
Where I was not worthy to be,
For that I thank you and God, to Whom I pray
To reward you for it; there is no more to say.
Unto my father gladly will I go,
And with him dwell unto my life's end.
"Where I was fostered as a child full small,
Until I be dead I will lead my life there,
A widow clean in body, heart, and all.
For since I gave to you my maidenhead,
And am your true wife, there is no doubt,
God forbid such a lord's wife to take
Another man as husband or as mate!
"And of your new wife God of his grace
Grant you happiness and prosperity!
For I will gladly yield her my place,
In which I was accustomed to be blissful.
For since it pleases you, my lord," said she,
"Who once was all my heart's peace,
That I shall go, I will go when you please.
"But inasmuch as you offer me such dowry
As I first brought, it is well in my mind
It was my wretched clothing, in no way fair,
Which to me were hard to find now.
O good God! How gentle and how kind
You seemed by your speech and your visage
The day that our marriage was made!
"But sooth is said -- always I find it true,
For in fact it is proven by me --
When love is old it is not the same as when it was new.
But certainly, lord, for no adversity,
Even if I were to die miserably, it shall not be
That ever in word or deed I shall repent
That I gave you my heart whole heartedly.
"My lord, you know that in my father's place
You had me stripped out of my poor clothing,
And had me richly clad, by your grace.
To you I brought nothing else, beyond doubt,
But faith, and nakedness, and maidenhead;
And here in return your clothing I restore,
And also your wedding ring, for evermore.
"The remnant of your jewels ready are
Within your chamber, dare I confidently say.
Naked out of my father's house," said she,
"I came, and naked must I return.
All your pleasure will I eagerly follow;
But yet I hope it be not your intention
That I should go without a smock out of your palace.
"You could not do so shameful a thing,
That that same womb in which your children lay
Should before the people, in my walking,
Be seen all bare; therefore I you pray,
Let me not like a worm go by the way.
Remember, my own lord so dear,
I was your wife, though I unworthy were.
"Therefore, in recompense for my maidenhead,
Which I brought, and nothing I bear back,
Condescend to give me, as my recompense,
Only such a smock as I was accustomed to wear,
That I with it may cover the womb of her
Who was your wife. And here take I my leave
Of you, my own lord, lest I you grieve."
"The smock," said he, "that thou hast on thy back,
Let it be (there) still, and bear it forth with thee."
But scarcely that same word he spoke,
But went his way, for grief and for pity.
Before the folk she strips herself,
And in her smock, with head and foot all bare,
Toward her father's house forth is she gone.
The folk follow her, weeping on their way,
And Fortune ever they curse as they go;
But she from weeping kept her eyes dry,
And in this time no word she spoke.
Her father, who heard this news straightway,
Curses the day and time that Nature
Shaped him to be a living creature.
For doubtless this old poor man
Was ever in suspicion of her marriage;
For ever he believed, since it began,
That when the lord had fulfilled his desires,
He would think it was a degradation
To his rank so low to stoop,
And get rid of her as soon as ever he could.
To meet his daughter hastily goes he,
For he by noise of folk knew her coming,
And with her old coat, insofar as it could
He covered her, full sorrowfully weeping.
But on her body he could not bring it,
For coarse was the cloth, and more of age
By many days than at her marriage.
Thus with her father for a certain space of time
Dwells this flower of womanly patience,
That neither by her words nor her face,
Before the folk, nor also in their absence,
She showed that to her was done offence;
Nor of her high estate no remembrance
Had she, according to her countenance.
No wonder is, for in her great estate
Her spirit was ever in full humility;
No tender mouth, no self-indulgent feelings,
No pomp, nor outward appearance of royalty,
But full of patient goodness,
Discreet and without pride, ever honorable,
And to her husband ever meek and stable.
Men speak of Job, and mostly for his humility,
As clerks, when they want, know well how to write,
Especially of men, but in truth,
Though clerks praise women but a little,
There can no man in humility acquit himself
As woman can, nor can be half so true
As women are, unless it happened recently.
From Bologna is this Earl of Panyk come,
Of which the news up sprang to high ranks and low,
And to the people's ears, one and all,
Was made known also that a new marchioness 
He brought with him, in such pomp and riches
That never was there seen with man's eye
Such a noble array in all West Lombardy.
The marquis, who arranged and knew all this,
Before this earl was come, sent his messenger
For that same innocent poor Griselda;
And she with humble heart and glad visage,
Not with any proud thought in her heart,
Came at his command, and on her knees set herself,
And reverently and wisely she greeted him.
"Griselda," said he, "my will is completely
That this maiden, who shall be wedded to me,
Be received to-morrow as royally
As it is possible in my house to be,
And also that every person, according to his rank
Have his due respect, in seating and service
And great pleasure, as I can best arrange.
"I have no women capable, certainly,
The chambers to put in order
According to my wishes, and therefore I would like
That thine be the supervision of all this business.
Thou knowest also of old all my desires;
Though thy dress be bad and in poor condition,
Do thou thy duty at least."
"Not only, lord, I am glad," said she,
"To do your wishes, but I desire also
You to serve and please in accord with my rank
Without weakening, and shall evermore;
Nor never, for any happiness nor any woe,
Shall the spirit within my heart cease
To love you best with all my true will."
And with that word she began to prepare the house,
And to set tables, and make beds;
And took pains to do all that she could,
Praying the chambermaids, for God's sake,
To hasten themselves, and fast sweep and dust;
And she, the most willing to serve of all,
Has every chamber prepared and his hall.
About mid-morning did this earl alight,
Who with him brought these noble children two,
For which the people ran to see the sight
Of their accoutrements, so rich in appearance;
And then for the first time amongst themselves they say
That Walter was no fool, though he desired
To change his wife, for it was for the best.
For she is fairer, as they all decide,
Than is Griselda, and more tender of age,
And fairer fruit between them should fall,
And more pleasing, because of her high lineage.
Her brother also so fair was of visage
That the people take pleasure in seeing them,
Commending now the marquis's governance.
"O stormy people! Inconstant and ever untrue!
Ever undiscerning and changing like a weather vane!
Delighting ever in rumor that is new,
For like the moon ever you wax and wane!
Always full of chattering, not worth a penny!
Your judgment is false, your constancy proves evil;
A full great fool is he that believes in you."
Thus said serious folk in that city,
When the people gazed up and down,
For they were glad, right for the novelty,
To have a new lady of their town.
No more of this make I now mention,
But to Griselda again will I address myself,
And tell her constancy and her diligence.
Full busy was Griselda in every thing
That was pertaining to the feast.
Not at all was she ashamed of her clothing,
Though it was crude and also somewhat ragged;
But with glad manner to the gate is went
With other folk to greet the marchioness,
And after that carries on her work.
With such glad manner his guests she receives,
And so skillfully, each according to his rank,
That no man perceives any fault,
But ever they wonder who she might be
That in such poor array was to be seen,
And knew how to do such honor and reverence,
And deservedly they praise her prudence.
In all this mean while she did not cease
This maid and also her brother to commend
With all her heart, in full benign intention,
So well that no man could praise her more highly.
But at the last, when these lords went
To sit down to dinner, he called
Griselda, as she was busy in his hall.
"Griselda," said he, as if it were a joke,
"How do you like my wife and her beauty?"
"Right well," said she, "my lord; for, in good faith,
I never saw so fair a one as she.
I pray to God to give her prosperity;
And so I hope that he will to you send
Pleasure enough unto your lives' end.
"One thing I beseech you, and warn also,
That you not distress with any tormenting
This tender maiden, as you have done to others;
For she has been reared in her nurture
More tenderly, and, as I believe,
She could not endure adversity 
As could a poorly reared creature."
And when this Walter saw her patience,
Her glad expression, and no malice at all,
And he so often had done to her offence,
And she ever steadfast and constant as a wall,
Continuing ever her innocence in every way,
This stern marquis inclined his heart
To have pity upon her womanly steadfastness.
"This is enough, Griselda mine," said he;
"Be now no more frightened nor displeased.
I have thy faith and thy goodness,
As well as ever woman was, tested,
In great estate and in poverty.
Now I know, dear wife, thy steadfastness" --
And took her in arms and kissed her.
And she for amazement took of it no notice;
She heard not what thing he said to her;
She fared as if she had suddenly awakened out of a sleep,
Until out of her bewilderment she suddenly awoke.
"Griselda," said he, "by God, who for us died,
Thou art my wife, and none other I have,
Nor ever had, as God my soul may save!
"This is thy daughter, which thou hast supposed
To be my wife; that other truly
Shall be my heir, as I have ever intended;
Thou bore him in thy body truly.
At Bologna I have kept them secretly;
Take them back, for now mayst thou not say
That thou hast lost any of thy children two.
"And folk that otherwise have said of me,
I declare to them clearly that I have done this deed
For no malice, nor for no cruelty,
But to test in thee thy womanhood,
And not to slay my children -- God forbid! --
But to keep them secretly and quietly,
Until I knew thy perseverence and all thy will."
When she heard this, down she falls in a swoon
For pitiful joy, and after her swooning
She calls both her young children to her,
And in her arms, pitifully weeping,
Embraces them, and tenderly kissing
Full like a mother, with her salt tears
She bathed both their visage and their hair.
O what a pathetic thing it was to see
Her swooning, and her humble voice to hear!
"Great thanks, lord, may God repay it to you," said she,
"That you have saved for me my children dear!
Now care I never to be dead right here;
Since I stand in your love and in your grace,
Death does not matter, nor when my spirit may pass (away)!
"O tender, o dear, o my young children!
Your woeful mother truly believed 
That cruel hounds or some foul animal pests
Had eaten you; but God of his mercy
And your benign father tenderly
Has had you protected" -- and in that same moment
All suddenly she fell down to the ground.
And in her swoon so tightly holds she
Her children two, when she embraced them,
That with great effort and great difficulty
The children from her arm they did tear away.
O many a tear on many a pitiful face
Down ran of them that stood beside her;
Hardly about her might they remain.
Walter comforts her and her sorrow relieves;
She rises up, disconcerted, from her trance,<b>
And every person makes joy and festivity for her
Until she has regained her composure.
Walter strives so faithfully to please her
That it was delightful to see the happiness
Between them two, now they are met together.
These ladies, when they see their time,
Have taken her and into chamber they go,
And strip her out of her crude clothing,
And in a cloth of gold that brightly shone,
With a crown of many a rich stone
Upon her head, they into hall her brought,
And there she was honored as she deserved.
Thus has this pitiful day a blissful end,
For every man and woman does his might
This day in mirth and revel to spend
Until in the sky shone the stars' light.
For more splendid in every man's sight
This feast was, and greater of cost,
Than was the revel of their marriage.
Full many a year in high prosperity
Live these two in peace and in quiet,
And richly his daughter married he
Unto a lord, one of the worthiest
Of all Italy; and then in peace and rest
His wife's father in his court he keeps,
Until the soul out of his body creeps.
His son succeeds in his heritage
In rest and peace, after his father's day,
And fortunate was also in marriage,
Although he put not his wife in great tests.
This world is not so strong, there is no denying,
As it has been in old times long ago,
And listen to what this author says concerning this (tale).
This story is said not so that wives should
Follow Griselda in humility,
For it would be intolerable, though they would (want to),
But so that every person, in his station in life,
Should be constant in adversity
As was Griselda; therefore Petrarch writes
This story, which with high style he composes.
For since a woman was so patient
Unto a mortal man, well more we ought to
Receive with a good will all that God sends us;
For it is very reasonable that he test what he made.
But he tests no man that he redeemed,
As says Saint James, if you his epistle read;
He tests folk all the time, it is no doubt,
And permits us, for our own good
With sharp whips of adversity
Full often to be beaten in various ways;
Not to know our will, for certainly he,
Before we were born, knew all our frailty;
And for our best is all his governance.
Let us then live in virtuous forbearance.
But one word, lords, hear before I go:
It would be very difficult to find now-a-days
In all the town Griseldas three or two;
For if they were put to such tests,
The gold of them has now been so badly debased
With brass, that though the coin be fair to look at,
It would rather break in two than bend.
For which here, for the love of the Wife of Bath --
Whose life and all her sect may God maintain
In high mastery, and otherwise it would be a pity --
I will with lusty heart, fresh and vigorous,
Say you a song to make you happy, I believe;
And let us stint of serious matter.
Hear my song that says in this manner:
Griselda is dead, and also her patience,
And both together buried in Italy;
For which I cry in the hearing of all
No wedded man so bold be to test
His wife's patience trusting to find
Griselda, for certainly he shall faille.
O noble wives, full of great prudence,
Let no humility nail down your tongue,
Nor let any clerk have cause or eagerness
To write about you a story of such marvel
As of patient and kind Griselda,
Lest Chichevache swallow you in her entrails!
Follow Echo, who holds no silence,
But ever answers in reply.
Be not fooled because of your innocence,
But eagerly take the governance to yourself.
Imprint well this lesson in your mind,
Since it may work to the benefit of all.
You arch-wives, stand ready for battle,
Since you are strong as is a great camel;
Suffer not that men do offense to you.
And slender wives, feeble in battle,
Be fierce as is a tiger yonder in India;
Ever wag your tongues like a windmill, I you advise.
Fear them not; do them no reverence,
For though thy husband be armed in mail,
The arrows of thy spiteful eloquence
Shall pierce his breast and also his neck-guard.
In jealousy I advise also that thou bind him,
And thou shalt make him cower as does a quail.
If thou be fair, where folk are present,
Show thou thy visage and thy apparel;
If thou be ugly, be lavish in thy expenditures;
To get thee friends always work hard;
Be ever in behavior as light as a leaf on a linden tree,
And let him grieve, and weep, and wring his hands, and wail!
[When ended was the tale of this worthy Clerk,
Our Host said, and swore, "By God's bones,
I would rather than have a barrel of ale
My wife at home had heard this legend once!
This is a fine tale for this occasion,
For my purposes, if you knew my will;
But thing that will not be, let it be still."]
A merchant once dwelled at Seint-Denis, 
Who was rich, for which men considered him wise.
He had a wife of excellent beauty;
And she was sociable and fond of revelry, 
Which is a thing that causes more expense
Than is worth all the good cheer and reverence 
That men do to them at festivities and at dances. 
Such salutations and courtesies
Pass away as does a shadow upon the wall;
But woe to him that must pay for all!
The poor (hapless) husband, always he must pay, 
He must clothe us, and he must adorn us
Richly, all for the sake of his own reputation,
In which finery we dance merrily.
And if it happens he can not pay, 
Or else desires to endure no such expense,
But thinks it is wasted and lost,
Then another must pay for our costs,
Or lend us gold, and that is perilous.
This noble merchant held a worthy house,
For which he always had so many guests
Because of his generosity, and because his wife was fair, 
That it is a wonder; but listen to my tale.
Among all his guests, high ranking and low,
There was a monk, a handsome man and a bold one --
I believe he was about thirty years old --
Who continually was drawing to that place.
This young monk, who had so handsome a face,
Was so acquainted with the good man,
Since their first acquaintance began,
That in his house as intimate was he 
As it is possible for any friend to be.
And in view of the fact that this good man,
And also this monk of whom I began (to tell),
The two of them, were both born in one village, 
The monk claims him as a kinsman,
And he does the same; he not once says 'nay,'
But was as glad of this as a fowl is of day,
For to his heart it was a great pleasure.
Thus are they knit with eternal alliance,
And each of them assured the other 
Of brotherhood while their life may endure.
Free-handed was Don John, and generous in spending
In that house, and full of diligence
To do pleasure, and also great expenditure. 
He did not forget to give to the lowest ranking servant
In all that house; but according to their rank, 
He gave to the lord, and then to all his household, 
When he came, some sort of suitable gift,
For which they were as glad of his coming
As a fowl is happy when the sun rises up.
No more of this for now, for it suffices.
But as it happened, this merchant on a day
Decided to make ready his preparations
To travel to the town of Bruges ,
To buy there a quantity of merchandise;
For which he has to Paris sent immediately
A messenger, and has prayed Don John
That he should come to Seint-Denis to visit
With him and with his wife a day or two,
Before he went to Bruges, indeed.
This noble monk, of whom I tell you,
Has of his abbot, as he pleases, permission, 
Because he was a man of great prudence
And also an officer, to ride out
To see to their granges and their capacious barns,
And he comes quickly to Seint-Denis.
Who was so welcome as my lord Don John,
Our dear cousin, full of courtesy?
With him he brought a jug of malmsey wine, 
And also another full of fine white wine,
And game fowls, as always was his custom.
And thus I let them eat and drink and amuse themselves,
This merchant and this monk, for a day or two.
The third day, this merchant up arises,
And seriously considers his business,
And he goes up into his counting-house
To reckon with himself, as it well may be,
Of that same year how it stood with him,
And how he had spent his funds,
And if he had profited or not.
His account books and his moneybags many a one
He lays before him on his counting-board.
His treasure and his hoard was very rich,
For which he very tightly shut his counting house-door;
And also he wanted that no one should hinder him
From (making) his accounts, for the time being;
And thus he sits until it was past nine o'clock.
Don John had also risen in the morning,
And in the garden walks to and fro,
And has said his prayers very courteously.
This good wife came walking alone 
Into the garden, where he walks quietly,
And salutes him, as she has often done.
A maid servant came in her company,
Whom she may govern and guide as she pleases,
For the maid was yet subject to adult discipline.
"Oh my dear cousin, Don John," she said,
"What ails you to rise so early?"
"Niece," said he, "it ought enough suffice
To sleep five hours upon a night,
Unless it were for an old enfeebled creature, 
As are these wedded men, that lie and doze
As in his lair sits a weary hare,
Which is greatly distressed by hounds great and small.
But dear niece, why are you so pale?
I believe, certainly, that the head of our household
Has labored you since the night began
So much that you badly have need to rest."
And with that word he laughed very merrily,
And of his own thought he grew all red.
This fair wife began to shake her head
And said thus, "Yea, God knows all," she said.
"Nay, my cousin, it stands not so with me;
For, by that God that gave me soul and life,
In all the realm of France there is no wife
That has less desire for that sorry play.
For I may sing `alas and alack
That I was born,' but to no one," she said,
"Dare I tell how it stands with me.
Therefore I intend to go out of this land,
Or else to make an end of myself,
I am so full of dread and also of care."
This monk began to stare upon this wife,
And said, "Alas, my niece, God forbid
That you, for any sorrow or any dread,
Should destroy yourself; but tell me your grief.
Perhaps I can, in your unhappy situation,
Advise or help; and therefore tell me
All your trouble, for it shall be secret.
For on my prayer book I make an oath
That never in my life, willing or unwilling,
Shall I betray any of your secrets."
"The same in reply to you," she said, "I say.
By God and by this prayer book I swear,
Though men would tear me all to pieces
I shall never, even though I go to hell for it,
Betray a word of anything that you tell me,
Not for any kinship nor alliance,
But truly for love and trust."
Thus they are sworn, and thereupon they kissed,
And each of them told the other what they pleased.
"Cousin," she said, "if I had a space of time,
As I have none, and especially in this place,
Then would I tell a legend of my life,
What I have suffered since I was a wife
Because of my husband, although he is your cousin."
"Nay," said this monk, "by God and Saint Martin,
He is no more cousin unto me
Than is this leaf that hangs on the tree!
I call him so, by Saint Denis of France,
To have the more opportunity of acquaintance
With you, whom I have loved especially
Above all women, certainly.
This I swear to you on my religious vows.
Tell your grief, lest that he come down;
And hasten you, and go your way quickly."
These old noble Bretons in their days
Of diverse adventures made lays,
Rhymed in their first Breton tongue,
Which lays with their instruments they sang
Or else read them for their pleasure;
And one of them have I in remembrance,
Which I shall say with as good will as I can.
But, sirs, because I am an unlearned man,
At my beginning first I you beseech,
Have me excused for my rude speech.
I learned never rhetoric, certainly;
Thing that I speak, it must be bare and plain.
I slept never on the Mount of Parnassus,
Nor learned Marcus Tullius Cicero.
Colors know I none, without doubt,
But such colors as grow in the field,
Or else such as men dye or paint.
Colors of rhetoric (figures of speech) are strange to me;
My spirit feels nothing of such matter.
But if you wish, you shall hear my tale.
In Armorica, that is called Brittany,
There was a knight that loved and worked hard
To serve a lady in his best manner;
And many a labor, many a great chivalric exploit,
He wrought for his lady before she was won.
For she was the fairest of all under the sun,
And also moreover come of such noble ancestry
That this knight hardly dared, for fear,
Tell her his woe, his pain, and his distress.
But at the last she, for his worthiness,
And namely for his meek submission,
Has taken such a pity on his suffering
That privately she agreed with him
To take him for her husband and hir lord,
Of such lordship as men have over their wives.
And to lead the more blissfully their lives,
Of his free will he swore her as a knight
That never in all his life he, day or night,
Should take upon himself any mastery
Against her will, nor show her jealousy,
But obey her, and follow her will in everything,
As any lover to his lady should,
Except for the appearance of sovereignty,
Which he would have to avoid bringing shame on his status (of knighthood). 
She thanked him, and with full great humbleness
She said, "Sir, since of your nobility
You offer me to have such freedom from restraint,
And would God that never between us two,
Through my fault, should be either war or strife.
Sir, I will be your humble true wife --
Have here my pledge -- until my heart bursts (until I die)." 
Thus are they both in quiet and in peace.
For one thing, sirs, I dare say confidently,
That friends must obey each other,
If they will long hold company.
Love will not be constrained by mastery.
When mastery comes, the God of Love immediately
Beats his wings, and farewell, he is gone!
Love is a thing free as any spirit.
Women, by nature, desire liberty,
And not to be constrained like a slave;
And so do men, if I shall say the truth.
Look who is most patient in love,
He is in the best position, superior to all.
Patience is a noble virtue, certainly,
For it vanquishes, as these clerks say,
Things that rigor should never attain.
One may not chide or complain for every word.
Learn to suffer, or else, as I may walk (I swear),
You shall learn it, whether you want to or not;
For in this world, certainly, there is no person 
Who does not sometime do or speak amiss.
Ire, sickness, or the position of the stars,
Wine, woe, or changing of the balance of bodily humors
Causes (one) very often to do or speak amiss.
On every wrong a man can not be avenged.
There must be moderation suitable to the occasion 
By every person who knows about governance. 
And therefore has this wise, worthy knight,
To live in ease, promised her forbearance,
And she to him full truly did swear
That never should there be fault in her.
Here may men see a humble, wise accord;
Thus has she taken her servant and her lord --
Servant in love, and lord in marriage.
Then was he both in lordship and servitude.
Servitude? Nay, but in lordship above,
Since he has both his lady and his love;
His lady, certainly, and his wife also,
The which accords to the law of love.
And when he was in this happy state,
Home with his wife he goes to his country,
Not far from Pedmark, where his dwelling was,
Where he lives in bliss and in pleasure.
Who could tell, unless he had been wedded,
The joy, the ease, and the happiness
That is between a husband and his wife?
A year and more lasted this blissful life,
Until the knight of whom I thus speak,
That was called Arveragus of Kayrrud,
Prepared himself to go and dwell a year or two
In England, which was also called Britain,
To seek in arms good reputation and honor --
For he set all his desire in such labor --
And dwelled there two years; the book says thus.
Now will I stop (speaking) of this Arveragus,
And I will speak of Dorigen his wife,
Who loves her husband as her heart's life.
For his absence she weeps and sighs,
As do these noble wives when it pleases them.
She mourns, stays awake, wails, fasts, complains;
Desire of his presence so presses upon her
That all this wide world she reckoned as worth nothing.
Her friends, who knew her gloomy thought,
Comfort her in all that ever they can.
They preach to her, they tell her night and day
That she slays herself without cause, alas!
And every comfort possible in this case
They do to her with all their concern,
All to make her leave her sadness.
In the course of time, as every one of you knows,
One may so long engrave on a stone
Until some figure is imprinted upon it.
So long have they comforted her until she
Received has, by hope and by reason,
The imprint of their consolation,
Through which her great sorrow began to be relieved;
She can not always continue in such passionate grief.
And also Arveragus, in (the midst of) all this care, 
Has sent her letters home (telling) of his welfare,
And that he will come hastily again;
Or else this sorrow would have slain her heart.
Her friends saw her sorrow began to slacken
And prayed her on their knees, for God's sake,
To come and walk about in company,
Away to drive her dark imagining.
And finally she granted that request,
For well she saw that it was for the best.
Now her castle stood close by the sea,
And often with her friends she walks
To amuse herself upon the bank on high,
Where she saw many a ship and sailing vessel
Sailing their course, where it pleases them to go.
But then was that a portion of her woe,
For to herself full often, she says "Alas!",
"Is there no ship, of so many as I see,
Will bring home my lord? Then would my heart be
All cured of its bitter, sharp pains."
Another time there would she sit and think,
And cast her eyes downward from the brink.
But when she saw the grisly black rocks,
For sheer fear her heart would so quake
That on her feet she could not sustain herself.
Then would she sit down upon the green,
And piteously stare into the sea,
And say right thus, with sorrowful, cold sighs:
"Eternal God, who through thy foreknowledge
Leads the world by sure governance, 
Men say you make nothing in vain.
But, Lord, these grisly fiendish black rocks,
That seem rather a foul confusion
Of work than any fair creation
Of such a perfectly wise and stable God,
Why have you created this unreasonable work?
For by this work, south, north, nor west, nor east,
There is no benefit to man, nor bird, nor beast;
It does no good, to my understanding, but does harm.
See you not, Lord, how it destroys mankind?
A  hundred thousand bodies of mankind
Have rocks slain, although their names are forgotten,
And this mankind is so fair a part of thy work
That thou made it like to thine own image.
Then it seemed you had a great love
Toward mankind; but how then may it be
That you make such means to destroy it,
Which means do no good, but always cause trouble?
I know well clerks will say as they please,
By logical reasoning, that all is for the best,
Though I can not know the causes.
But that same God that made wind to blow
Keep my lord! This is my conclusion.
To clerks I leave all disputation.
But would God that all these black rocks 
Were sunk into hell for his sake!
These rocks slay my heart for fear."
Thus would she say, with many a piteous tear.
Her friends saw that it was no pleasure
To roam by the sea, but discomfort,
And decide to amuse themselves somewhere else.
They lead her by rivers and by springs,
And also in other delightful places;
They dance and they play at chess and backgammon.
So on a day, early in the morning-tide,
Unto a garden that was there nearby,
In which they had made their arrangement
For victuals and for other provisions,
They go and amuse themselves all the long day.
And this was on the sixth morning of May,
Which May had painted with its soft showers
This garden full of leaves and of flowers;
And craft of man's hand so skillfully
Had adorned this garden, truly,
That never was there garden of such worth
Unless it were the true paradise.
The odor of flowers and the fresh sight
Would have made any heart light
That ever was born, unless too great sickness
Or too great sorrow held it in distress,
It was so full of beauty with pleasure.
After dinner they go to dance,
And sing also, save Dorigen alone,
Who made always her complaint and her moan,
For she did not see him on the dance go
Who was her husband and her love also.
But nonetheless she must a time abide
And with good hope let her sorrow slip away.
In this dance, among other men,
Danced a squire before Dorigen,
Who was more lively and more gaily dressed,
As to my judgement, than is the month of May.
He sings, dances, passing any man
That is, or was, since the world began.
Therewith he was, if one should him describe,
One of the most handsome men alive;
Young, strong, very valiant, and rich, and wise,
And well beloved, and held in great esteem.
And shortly, if I shall tell the truth,
Unknown by this Dorigen at all,
This lusty squire, servant to Venus,
Who was called Aurelius,
Had loved her best of any creature
Two years and more, as was his fate,
But he never dared tell her his grievance.
Copiously he drank all his penance (suffered intensely).
He was in despair; he dared say nothing,
Except in his songs somewhat he would reveal
His woe, as in a general lament;
He said he loved and was in no way loved in return
Of such subject matter made he many lays,
Songs, complaints, roundels, virelays,
(Saying) how he dared not his sorrow tell,
But suffers as a fury does in hell;
And he must die, he said, as did Echo
For Narcissus, she who dared not tell her woe.
In other ways than you hear me say,
He dared not reveal to her his woe,
Except that, by chance, sometimes at dances,
Where young folk observe their customs (of courtship),
It may well be he looked on her face
In such a manner as a man that asks for grace;
But she knew nothing of his intent.
Nonetheless it happened, before they went away,
Because he was her neighbor,
And was a man of good reputation and honor,
And (she) had known him for a long time,
They fell in speech; and forth, more and more,
Unto his purpose drew Aurelius,
And when he saw his time, he said thus:
"Madame," he said, "by God that this world made,
Providing that I knew it might gladden your heart,
I wish that day that your Arveragus
Went over the sea, that I, Aurelius,
Had went from where I should never have come back.
For well I know my service is in vain;
My reward is but the breaking of my heart.
Madame, have pity upon my bitter pains;
For with one word you may me slay or save.
Here at your feet would God that I were buried!
I have now no opportunity to say more;
Have mercy, sweet, or you will make me die!"
She did look upon Aurelius;
"Is this your desire," said she, "and say you thus?
Never before," she said, "Did I know what you meant.
But now, Aurelius, I know your intention,
By that same God that gave me soul and life,
I shall never be an untrue wife
In word nor deed, so long as I have my wits;
I will be his to whom that I am knit.
Take this for my final answer."
But after that in play thus she said:
"Aurelius," she said, "by high God above,
Yet would I grant you to be your love,
Since I see you so piteously lament.
On whatever day that from end to end of Brittany
You remove all the rocks, stone by stone,
So that they do not prevent ship nor boat to go --
I say, when you have made the coast so clean
Of rocks that there is no stone seen,
Then will I love you best of any man;
Have here my pledged word, in all that is in my power."
"Is there no other grace in you?" he said.
"No, by that Lord," she said, "that made me!
For well I know that it shall never happen.
Let such follies pass out of your heart.
What pleasure should a man have in his life
To go love another man's wife,
Who has her body whenever he pleases?"
Aurelius very often bitterly sighs;
Woe was Aurelius when he heard this,
And with a sorrowful heart he thus answered:
"Madame," he said, "this would be an impossiblity!
Then I must die of sudden horrible death."
And with that word he turned away immediately.
Then came her other friends many a one,
And in the garden paths roamed up and down,
And knew nothing of this business,
But suddenly began to revel anew
Until the bright sun lost its hue;
For the horizon has bereft the sun of its light --
This is as much to say that it was night --
And home they go in joy and in pleasure,
Save only wretched Aurelius, alas!
He to his house is gone with sorrowful heart.
He sees he can not escape from his death;
He thought that he felt his heart grow cold.
Up to the heaven his hands he did hold,
And on his bare knees he set himself down,
And in his delirium said his prayer. 
For utter woe out of his wits he suddenly went.
He knew not what he spoke, but thus he said;
With piteous heart he has begun his complaint 
Unto the gods, and first unto the sun:
He said, "Apollo, god and governor
Of every plant, herb, tree, and flower,
That gives, according to thy height (in the sky),
To each of them its time and its season,
As thy astronomical position changes low or high,
Lord Phoebus, cast thy merciful eye
On wretched Aurelius, who is as good as lost.
Lo, lord! My lady has sworn my death 
Without guilt, unless thy kindness
Upon my dying heart have some pity.
For well I know, lord Phoebus, if you wish,
You can help me best (of anyone), except for my lady.
Now grant that I may tell you
How I may be helped and in what manner.
"Your blissful sister, Lucina the bright,
Who of the sea is chief goddess and queen
(Though Neptune have godly dominion in the sea,
Yet empress above him is she),
You know well, lord, that just as her desire
Is to be kindled and ignited by your fire, 
For which she follows you very attentively,
Just so the sea desires naturally
To follow her, as she that is goddess
Both in the sea and rivers great and small.
Wherefore, lord Phoebus, this is my request --
Do this miracle, or make my heart break --
That now at this next opposition (of the sun and moon)
Which shall be in the sign of the Lion,
Pray her so great a high tide to bring
That five fathoms at the least it rise above
The highest rock in Armorican Brittany;
And let this flood-tide endure for two years.
Then certainly to my lady may I say,
`Keep your promise, the rocks are away.'
"Lord Phoebus, do this miracle for me.
Pray her that she go at no faster speed as you;
I say, pray your sister that she go
At no faster speed as you for these two years.
Then shall she be fully even with you always,
And spring flood will last both night and day.
And unless she agree in such manner
To grant me my sovereign lady dear,
Pray her to sink every rock down
Into her own dark region
Under the ground, in which Pluto dwells,
Or never more shall I win my lady.
Thy temple in Delphi I will barefoot seek.
Lord Phoebus, see the tears on my cheek,
And on my pain have some compassion."
And with that word he fell down in a faint,
And for a long time he lay in a trance.
His brother, who knew of his suffering,
Caught him up and to bed he has him brought.
Despaired in this torment and this thought
I leave this woeful creature lying;
Let him choose, for all I care, whether he will live or die. 
Arveragus, with well-being and great honor,
As he that was of chivalry the flower,
Is come home, and other worthy men.
O blissful art thou now, thou Dorigen,
That hast thy lusty husband in thine arms,
The vigorous knight, the worthy man of arms,
That loves thee as his own heart's life.
He not at all desired to be suspicious,
If any person had spoken, while he was away,
To her of love; he had of it no fear.
He pays no attention to any such matter,
But dances, jousts, makes her good cheer;
And thus in joy and bliss I let them dwell,
And of the sick Aurelius I will tell.
In suffering and in hellish torment
Two years and more lay wretched Aurelius,
Before he could set a foot on the ground;
Nor had he any comfort in this time,
Except from his brother, who was a clerk.
He knew of all this woe and all this suffering,
For to no other creature, certainly,
He dared say any word of this matter.
Under his breast he bore it more secretly
Than ever did Pamphilus for Galathee.
His breast was unhurt, in outward appearance,
But in his heart ever was the sharp arrow.
And well you know that for a wound healed only on the surface
In surgery the treatment is perilous,
Unless one could touch the arrow or grasp it.
His brother wept and wailed secretly,
Until at the last he remembered,
That while he was at Orleans in France --
As young clerks that are eager
To read arts that are arcane
Seek in every nook and every cranny
To learn specialized branches of learning --
He remembered that, one day,
At Orleans in a study hall he saw a book
Of natural science, which his fellow,
Who was at that time a bachelor of law,
Although he was there to learn another craft,
Had covertly left upon his desk;
Which book spoke much of the operations
Concerning the eight and twenty stations
That belong to the moon, and such folly
As in our days is not worth a fly --
For holy church's faith in our belief
Does not allow any illusion to grieve us.
And when this book was in his remembrance,
Straightway for joy his heart began to dance,
And to himself he said secretly,
"My brother shall be cured speedily;
For I am sure that there are sciences
By which men make diverse illusions,
Such as these subtle illusionists play.
For often at feasts have I well heard say
That illusionists within a large hall 
Have made come in a water and a barge,
And in the hall row up and down.
Sometimes a grim lion has seemed to come;
And sometimes flowers spring as in a field;
Sometimes a vine, and grapes white and red;
Sometimes a castle, all of mortar and stone;
And when they pleased, they made it suddenly disappear.
Thus it seemed to every man's sight.
"Now then conclude I thus: that if I might
At Orleans find some old fellow
Who had these moon's stations in mind,
Or other natural science beyond that
He should well make my brother have his love.
For with an apparition a clerk may make it seem,
To man's sight, that all the rocks black
Of Brittany were removed every one,
And ships by the shore come and go,
And in such form endure a week or two.
Then my brother would be cured of his woe;
Then must she by necessity keep her promise,
Or else he shall shame her at the least."
Why should I make a longer tale of this?
Unto his brother's bed he is come,
And such encouragement he gave him to go
To Orleans that he leaped up immediately,
And on his way forth then is he gone
In hope to be relieved of his care.
When they had come almost to that city,
Not more than two or three furlongs,
A young clerk roaming by himself they met,
Who in Latin politely greeted them,
And after that he said a wonderful thing:
"I know," he said, "the cause of your coming."
And before they went any foot farther,
He told them all that was in their intention.
This Breton clerk asked him about fellows
Whom he had known in old days,
And he answered him that they were dead,
For which he wept very often many a tear.
Down off his horse Aurelius alighted straightway,
And with this magician forth he is gone
Home to his house, and put them well at ease.
They lacked no foods that might please them.
So well appointed a house as this one was 
Aurelius in his life saw never a one.
He showed him, before he went to supper,
Forests, parks full of wild deer;
There he saw harts with their high horns,
The greatest that ever were seen with eye.
He saw a hundred of them slain by hounds,
And some bled because of bitter wounds from arrows.
He saw, when these wild deer were removed,
These hunters with falcons upon a fair riverbank,
That with their hawks have slain the heron.
Then he saw knights jousting in a plain;
And after this he provided him such pleasure
That he showed him his lady in a dance,
In which he himself danced, as he thought.
And when this master that wrought this magic 
Saw it was time, he clapped his two hands,
And farewell! All our revel was gone.
And yet moved they never out of the house,
While they saw all this marvelous sight,
But in his study, where his books are,
They sat still, and no person (was there) but these three.
This master called his squire to him,
And said to him thus: "Is our supper ready?
Almost an hour it is, I declare,
Since I ordered you to make our supper,
When these worthy men went with me
Into my study, where my books are."
"Sir," said this squire, "when it pleases you,
It is all ready, even if you want it right now."
"Go we then to sup," said he, "as is the best (to do).
These amorous folk sometime must have their rest."
At after-supper they began to discuss
What sum this master's payment should be
To remove all the rocks of Brittany,
And also from Gironde to the mouth of Seine.
He raised difficulties, and swore, as God may him save,
Less than a thousand pounds he would not have,
Nor would he go gladly even for that sum. 
Aurelius, with blissful heart, at once
Answered thus: "Fie on a thousand pounds!
This wide world, which men say is round,
I would give it, if I were lord of it.
This bargain is fully concluded, for we are agreed.
You shall be paid truly, by my pledged word!
But look now, for no negligence or laziness
You delay us here any longer than to-morrow."
"Nay," said this clerk, "have here my faith as a pledge."
To bed is gone Aurelius when it pleased him,
And well nigh all that night he had his rest.
What for his labor and his hope of bliss,
His woeful heart of suffering had relief.
Upon the morrow, when it was day,
To Brittany took they the direct route,
Aurelius and this magician beside him,
And are arrived where they would stay.
And this was, as these books remind me,
The cold, frosty season of December.
Phoebus grew old, and colored grayish silver,
That in his hot declination (in summer)
Shone like burnished gold with bright rays;
But now in Capricorn he alights down,
Where he shone full pale, I dare well say.
The bitter frosts, with the sleet and rain,
Have destroyed the green in every garden.
Janus sits by the fire, with double beard,
And drinks the wine from his buffalo horn;
Before him stands meat of the tusked boar,
And "Noel" cries every lusty man.
Aurelius in all that ever he can
Provides for this master entertainment and reverence,
And prays him to work diligently
To bring him out of his bitter pains,
Or with a sword he would slit his heart.
This subtle clerk had such pity for this man
That night and day he worked as fast as he can
To seek a time for his astronomical operation; 
This is to say, to make illusion,
By such an appearance or conjurer's trick --
I know no technical terms of astrology --
That she and every person should believe and say
That the rocks of Brittany were away,
Or else they were sunk under ground.
So at the last he has his time found
To make his tricks and his wretched deeds
Of such a superstitious cursedness.
His astronomical tables of Toledo he brought forth,
Accurately corrected, nor was there anything lacking,
Neither his tables of single years nor of twenty-year periods,
Nor his dates for calculations, nor his other apparatus,
Such as are his table of distances and his angles for calculation
And his table for computing motions (of the planets)
For his divisions of the sphere in every detail. 
And by his eighth sphere in his working
He knew full well how far the star Alnath was shoved
From the head of that fixed Aries above,
That in the ninth sphere is observed;
Full subtly he calculated all this.
When he had found his first position of the moon,
He knew the remnant by astronomical tables,
And knew the arising of his moon well,
And in which planet's face and term (zodiacal divisions), and everything;
And knew full well the moon's position
In accordance with his operation,
And knew also his other observations
For such illusions and such evil practices
As heathen folk used in those days.
For which no longer he made delay,
But through his magic, for a week or two,
It seemed that all the rocks were away.
Aurelius, who is yet in despair 
Whether he shall have his love or fare badly,
Waits night and day for this miracle;
And when he knew that there was no obstacle,
That every one of these rocks were removed,
Down to his mistress' feet he fell at once,
And said, "I woeful wretched, Aurelius,
Thank you, lord, and my lady Venus,
Who have helped me out of my deadly cares."
And to the temple he has held forth his way,
Where he knew he should see his lady.
And when he saw his time, immediately he,
With fearful heart and with full humble manner,
Has saluted his sovereign lady dear:
"My true lady," said this woeful man,
"Whom I most dread and love as I best know how,
And am of all this world most reluctant to displease,
Were it not that I for you have such distress
That I must die here at your feet right now,
I would tell nothing of how I am beset by woe. 
But certainly either I must die or complain;
You slay me guiltless for sheer pain.
But though you have no pity on my death,
Think carefully before you break your pledged word.
Repent, for that God above,
Before you slay me because I love you.
For, madam, you know well what you have promised --
Not that I claim any thing as a right
From you, my sovereign lady, except for your good favor --
But in a garden yonder, at a particular place,
You know right well what you promised me;
And in my hand you pledged your word
To love me best -- God knows, you said so,
Although I am unworthy of it.
Madam, I speak it for your honor
More than to save my heart's life right now --
I have done as you commanded me;
And if you agree, you may go see.
Do as you please; have your promise in mind,
For, living or dead, right there you shall find me.
In you lies the power to make me live or die --
But well I know the rocks are away."
He takes his leave, and she astounded stood;
In all her face was not a drop of blood.
She never expected to have come in such a trap.
"Alas," she said, "that ever this should happen!
For I never supposed by possibility
That such a wonder or marvel could be!
It is against the laws of nature."
And home she goes a sorrowful creature;
For sheer fear she can hardly walk.
She weeps, wails, all one day or two,
And swoons, that it was pitiful to see.
But why it was she told to no person,
For Arveragus had gone out of town.
But to herself she spoke, and said thus,
With face pale and with full sorrowful manner,
In her complaint, as you shall after hear:
"Alas," said she, "on thee, Fortune, I complain,
That without warning hast wrapped me in thy chain,
From which to escape I know no help, 
Save only death or else dishonor;
One of these two I am compelled to choose.
But neverthelees, yet I would rather lose
My life than of my body to have a shame,
Or know myself false, or lose my good name;
And with my death I may be free from blame, indeed.
Has there not many a noble wife before this,
And many a maid, slain herself, alas,
Rather than do sin with her body?
"Yes indeed, certainly, lo, these stories bear witness:
When thirty tyrants, full of cursedness,
Had slain Phidon in Athens at the feast,
They commanded (the guards) to seize his daughters 
And bring them before them as an insult,
All naked, to fulfill their foul delight,
And in their father's blood they made them dance
Upon the pavement, God give them misfortune!
For which these woeful maidens, full of dread,
Rather than they would lose their maidenhood,
They secretly have leaped into a well
And drowned themselves, as the books tell.
"They of Messene had (people) search out and seek
Fifty maidens of Sparta also,
On whom they would do their lechery.
But there was none of all that company
That she was not slain, and with a good intent
Chose rather to die than assent
To be deprived of her maidenhood.
Why should I then be afraid to die?
Lo, also, the tyrant Aristoclides,
That loved a maiden, called Stymphalides,
When her father was slain on a night,
Unto Diana's temple she goes directly,
And seized the statue in her two hands,
From which statue she would never go.
No person could pull her hands away from it 
Until she was slain, right in the same place.
"Now since maidens had such disdain
To be defiled by man's foul delight,
Well ought a wife rather herself slay
Than be defiled, as it seems to me.
What shall I say of Hasdrubale's wife,
That at Carthage deprived herself of her life?
For when she saw that Romans won the town,
She took her children all, and leaped down
Into the fire, and chose rather to die
Than any Roman did her a dishonor.
Has not Lucretia slain herself, alas,
At Rome, when she was raped
By Tarquin, for she thought it was a shame
To live when she had lost her good name?
The seven maidens of Miletus also
Have slain themselves, for sheer dread and woe,
Rather than folk of Galatia should rape them.
More than a thousand stories, as I guess,
Could I now tell concerning this matter.
When Habradate was slain, his wife so dear
Herself slew, and let her blood pour
In Habradate's wounds deep and wide,
And said, `My body, at the least,
There shall no person defile, if I can (help it)."
"Why should I tell more examples concerning this,
Since so many have themselves slain
Well rather than they would be defiled?
I will conclude that it is better for me
To slay myself than be defiled thus.
I will be true unto Arveragus,
Or rather slay myself in some manner,
As did Demotion's daughter dear
Because she would not defiled be.
O Scedasus, it is a very great pity
To read how thy daughters died, alas,
Who slew themselves for a similar sort of cause.
As great a pity was it, or well more,
The Theban maiden that for Nichanore
Slew herself, exactly for such sort of woe.
Another Theban maiden did exactly the same;
Because one of Macedonia had raped her,
She with her death avenged her maidenhood.
What shall I say of Nicerates' wife,
That for a similar case deprived herself of her life?
How true also to Alcebiades was
His lover, who chose rather to die 
Than to allow his body to be unburied.
Lo, what a wife was Alcestis," she said.
"What says Homer of good Penelope?
All Greece knows of her chastity.
By God, of Laodomia is written thus,
That when at Troy Protheselaus was slain,
No longer would she live after his day (i.e., death).
The same of noble Portia I can tell;
Without Brutus she could not live,
To whom she had entirely given her heart.
The perfect wifehood of Arthemesie
Honored is through all heathendom.
O Teuta, queen, thy wifely chastity
To all wives may be a mirror.
The same thing I say of Bilia,
Of Rhodogune, and also Valeria."
Thus Dorigen complained a day or two,
Intending ever that she would die.
But neverthelees, upon the third night,
Home came Arveragus, this worthy knight,
And asked her why she wept so bitterly;
And she began to weep, ever the longer (she wept) the more (she wept) . 
"Alas," said she, "that ever I was born!
Thus have I said," said she, "thus have I sworn" --
And told him all as you have heard before;
There is no need to repeat it to you any more.
This husband, with cheerful demeanor, in a friendly manner
Answered and said as I shall tell you:
"Is there anything else, Dorigen, but this?"
"Nay, nay," she said, "So help me God!
This is too much, even if it were God's will."
"Yes, wife," he said, "let sleep that which is still.
It may be well, perhaps, yet to day.
You shall keep your pledged word, by my faith!
For as surely as God may have mercy upon me,
I had well rather be stabbed 
For sheer love which I to have for you,
Than you should (do anything but) keep and save your pledged word.
One's pldged word is the highest thing that one may keep" --
But with that word he immediately burst into tears,
And said, "I you forbid, upon pain of death,
That never, while thy life or breath lasts,
Thou tell any person about this adventure --
As I best can, I will my woe endure --
Nor make any outward appearance of sadness,
That folk may believe or guess anything harmful concerning you."
And forth he called a squire and a maid:
"Go forth right now with Dorigen," he said,
"And bring her to such a place quickly."
They take their leave, and on their way they go,
But they knew not why she thither went.
He would no person tell his intention.
Perhaps a heap of you, indeed,
Will consider him a foolish man in this
That he will put his wife in jeopardy.
Listen to the tale before you cry out about her.
She may have better fortune than it seems to you;
And when you have heard the tale, judge.
This squire, who was called Aurelius,
On Dorigen who was so amorous,
By chance happened to meet her 
Amidst the town, right in the busiest street,
As she was about to go the way directly
Toward the garden where she had promised (to go).
And he was going toward the garden also;
For well he spied when she would go
Out of her house to any sort of place.
But thus they met, by chance or luck,
And he salutes her cheerfully,
And asked her where she went;
And she answered, as if she were half mad,
"Unto the garden, as my husband commanded,
My pledged word to keep -- alas, alas!"
Aurelius began to wonder about this case,
And in his heart had great compassion
Of her and of her lamentation,
And of Arveragus, the worthy knight,
Who commanded her to keep all that she had promised,
So hateful to him it was that his wife should break her word;
And in his heart he took great pity on this,
Considering what would be best in every respect,
That he would rather yet refrain from his desire
Than do so great a churlish despicable act
Against generosity and all nobility of character;
For which in few words he said thus:
"Madam, say to your lord Arveragus
That since I see his great graciousness
To you, and also I see well your distress,
That he would rather have shame (and that would be a pity)
Than you should thus break your pledged word to me,
I would well rather suffer woe always
Than I should break apart the love between you two.
I release you, madam, into your hand I return
Freely every pledge and every bond
That you have made to me before now,
Since that time when you were born.
I pledge my word, I shall never reprove you 
For any promise, and here I take my leave,
Of the truest and the best wife
That ever yet I knew in all my life.
But let every wife beware of her promise!
Remember Dorigen, at the least.
Thus can a squire do a gentle deed
As well as can a knight, without doubt."
She thanks him upon her bare knees,
And home unto her husband she is gone,
And told him all, as you have heard me say;
And be you sure, he was so well pleased
That it would be impossible for me to write.
Why should I write longer about this matter?
Arveragus and Dorigen his wife
In perfect bliss lead forth their life.
Never again was there any anger between them.
He cherishes her as though she were a queen,
And she was to him true for evermore.
Of these two folk you get of me no more.
Aurelius, that all his expenditure has forfeited,
Curses the time that ever he was born:
"Alas!" said he. "Alas, that I promised
Of refined gold a thousand pounds of weight
Unto this scientist! What shall I do?
I see no more but that I am ruined.
My heritage I must of necessity sell,
And be a beggar; here I may not remain
And shame all my kin in this place,
Unless I can get a better grace (favor) from him.
But nonetheless, I will try him, (offering)
At specific days, year by year, to pay,
And thank him for his great courtesy.
My word I will keep, I will not lie."
With a sore heart he goes unto his money box,
And brought gold unto this scientist,
The value of five hundred pounds, I guess,
And him beseeches, of his nobleness,
To grant him days (on which to pay) the remnant;
And said, "Master, I dare well make boast,
I failed never of my pledged word as yet.
For surely my debt shall be repaid
To you, even though I have
To go a-begging in my bare tunic.
But if you would agree, upon my promise,
To grant me a respite for two years or three,
Then I would be well; for otherwise I must sell
My heritage; there is no more to tell."
This scientist soberly answered,
And said thus, when he heard these words:
"Have I not kept my agreement with thee?"
"Yes, certainly, well and truly," said he.
"Hast thou not had thy lady as it pleases thee?"
"No, no," said he, and sorrowfully he sighs.
"What was the cause? Tel me if thou know how."
Aurelius his tale immediately began,
And told him all, as you have heard before;
There is no need to repeat it to you again.
He said, "Arveragus, of his nobility,
Had rather die in sorrow and in distress
Than that his wife would be false of her pledged word."
The sorrow of Dorigen he told him also;
How loathfull to her it was to be a wicked wife,
And that she would rather have lost her life that day,
And that her word she swore through ignorance,
She never before had heard tell of illusion.
"That made me have for her such great pity;
And right as freely as he sent her to me,
As freely I sent her to him again.
This is the entire matter; there is no more to say."
This scientist answered, "Dear brother,
Every one of you did nobly to the other.
Thou art a squire, and he is a knight;
But God forbid, for his blissful might,
That a clerk could not do a gentle deed 
As well as any of you, it is no doubt!
Sir, I release thee from thy (debt of a) thousand pounds,
As if thou right now were crept out of the ground,
Nor never before now had known me.
For, sir, I will not take a penny from thee
For all my craft, nor anything for my labor.
Thou hast paid well for my living expenses.
It is enough, and farewell, have good day!"
And took his horse, and forth he goes his way.
Gentlemen, this question, then, will I ask now,
Which was the most free, as it seems to you?
Now tell me, before you farther go.
I know no more; my tale is at an end.
Great was the feast in Athens that day,
And also the pleasing season of that May
Made every person to be in such delight
That all that Monday they joust and dance,
And spend that day in Venus's noble service.
But because they must rise
Early, to see the great fight,
Unto their rest they went at nightfall.
And in the morning, when day did spring,
Noise and clattering of horses and armor 
There was in hostelries all about,
And to the palace there rode many a company
Of lords upon steeds and palfreys.
There canst thou see preparation of armor
So exotic and so rich, and wrought so well
Of goldsmiths' works, of embroidery, and of steel;
The bright shields, horses' head-armor, and horse-armor,
Gold-colored helms, coats of mail, tunics with heraldic devices; 
Lords in richly decorated robes on their coursers,
Knights of  (their) retinues, and also squires
Nailing heads to the spear-shafts, and buckling helms;
Fitting the shields with straps, fastening with laces --
Where it is needed they were not at all idle;
The steeds frothing on the golden bridles
Gnawing, and fast the armorers also
With file and hammer are spurring to and fro;
Yeomen on foot, and foot soldiers many a one
With short staves, thick as they can go;
Pipes, trumpets, kettle drums, bugles,
That blow bloody sounds in the battle;
The palace full of people everywhere,
Here three, there ten, debating, 
Conjecturing about these two Theban knights.
Some said thus, some said "it shall be so";
Some held with him with the black beard,
Some with the bald, some with the thickly haired;
Some said he looked grim, and he would fight:
"He has a battle-ax of twenty pounds of weight."
Thus was the hall full of conjecturing,
Long after the sun began to rise.
The great Theseus, who was awakened of his sleep
By the music and noise that was made,
Remained yet in the chamber of his rich palace 
Until the Theban knights, both equally
Honored, were fetched into the palace.
Duke Theseus was set at a window,
Arrayed exactly as if he were a god on a throne.
The people press thither full soon
In order to see him, and to do great reverence,
And also to hear his command and his decision.
A herald on a scaffold made a "Ho!"
Until all the noise of people was done,
And when he saw the people all still of noise,
Then showed he the mighty duke's will:
"The lord has of his great sound judgment
Considered that it would be destruction
To gentle blood to fight in the manner
Of mortal battle now in this undertaking.
Wherefore, to arrange matters so that they shall not die,
He will modify his previous plan.
No man therefore, upon punishment of loss of life,
No sort of arrow, nor battle-axe, nor short knife
Send into the lists or bring there;
Nor short sword, to stab with piercing point,
May no man neither draw, nor bear it by his side.
And no man shall ride at his opponent
More than one course with a sharply honed spear; 
Let him thrust, if he wishes, on foot, to defend himself.
And he who is at a disadvantage shall be taken
And not slain, but be brought unto the stake
That shall be placed on either side;
But thither he must (go) by force, and remain there.
And if so happen that the chieftain be taken
On either side, or else should slay his opponent,
The tournament shall last no longer.
God give you success! Go forth and lay on fast!
With long sword and with mace fight your fill.
Go now on your way; this is the lord's will."
The voice of people touched the heaven,
So loudly they cried with merry voices,
"God save such a lord, that is so good
He desires no destruction of blood!"
Up go the trumpets and the melody,
And to the lists rides the company,
In battle array, throughout all the city, 
Hung with cloth of gold, and not with serge.
Fully like a lord this noble duke did ride,
These two Thebans upon either side,
And after rode the queen and Emelye,
And after that another company
One after another, according to their rank.
And thus they pass throughout the city,
And they come to the lists in good time.
It was not yet fully prime (nine a.m.) of the day 
When Theseus was set very splendidly and nobly,
Ypolita the queen, and Emelye,
And other ladies about in tiers.
Unto the seats press all the crowd.
And westward, through the gates under Mars,
Arcite, and also the hundred of his party,
With red banner is entered right away;
And in that same moment Palamon
Is under Venus, eastward in the place,
With white banner and hardy countenance and face.
In all the world, to seek up and down,
So evenly, without variation,
There were not two such companies,
For there was no one so wise that could say
That any one had advantage over the other 
In worthiness, nor in status, nor age,
So evenly were they chosen, as I estimate.
And in two fair ranks they arrange themselves.
When every one of their names were read,
So that in their total number there would be no deception,
Then the gates were shut, and cried was aloud:
"Do now your duty, proud young knights!"
The heralds left their spurring up and down;
Now trumpets and bugles ring loud. 
There is no more to say, but from west and east
In go the spears very firmly in the lance-rests;
In goes the sharp spur into the flank.
There people see who can joust and who can ride;
There splinter spears upon thick shields;
He feels the stabbing through the breast-bone.
Up spring spears twenty foot on height;
Out go the swords bright as silver;
The helms they hew to pieces and cut into shreds
Out burst the blood in strong red streams;
With mighty maces they break the bones to pieces.
He did thrust through the thickest of the throng;
There strong steeds stumble, and down goes all,
He rolls under foot as does a ball;
On his feet he stabs with the broken shaft of his spear,
And he hurtles him down with his horse;
He is hurt through the body and then taken,
Despite all he can do, and brought unto the stake;
As was the agreement, right there he must abide.
Another on that other side is led away.
And for a while Theseus makes them rest,
To refresh themselves and drink, if they wish.
Many times these two Thebans have  
Met together, and (each) wrought woe to his opponent;
Each has unhorsed the other of them two.
There was not any tiger in the vale of Gargaphia, 
When her whelp is stolen when it is little,
So cruel on the hunt as is Arcite
For jealous heart upon this Palamon.
Nor in Benmarin there is not so fierce a lion,
That is hunted, or maddened by his hunger,
Nor of his prey desires so the blood,
As Palamon to slay his foe Arcite.
The fervent strokes bite on their helms;
Out runs red blood on both their sides.
Some time there is an end of every deed.
For before the sun went unto its rest,
The strong king Emetreus did seize
This Palamon, as he fought with Arcite,
And made his sword deep in his flesh to bite,
And by the force of twenty he (Palamon) is taken  
Without having surrendered, and dragged to the stake.
And in the rescue of this Palamon
The strong king Lygurge is born down,
And king Emetreus, despite all his strength,
Is carried out of his saddle a sword's length,
So hit him Palamon before he was taken.
But all for naught; he was brought to the stake.
His hardy heart could not help him:
He must abide, when he was caught,
By force and also by the agreed terms of battle.
Who sorrows now but woeful Palamon,
That must no more go again to fight?
And when Theseus had seen this sight,
Unto each one of the folk that fought thus 
He cried, "Stop! no more, for it is done!  
I will be true judge, and no partisan.
Arcite of Thebes shall have Emelye,
Who by his fortune has won her fairly."
Immediately there is a noise of people begun
For joy of this, so loud and clamorous indeed
It seemed that the lists should fall.
What now can fair Venus do above?
What says she now? What does this queen of love,
But weeps so, for lack of (having) her will,
Until her tears fell in the lists? 
She said, "I am disgraced, doubtless."
Saturn said, "Daughter, hold thy peace!
Mars has his will, his knight has all his request,
And, by my head, thou shalt be relieved soon."
The trumpeters, with the loud music,
The heralds, who full loudly yell and cry,
Are in their happiest state for joy of dan Arcite.
But listen to me, and stop the noise for a little,
(Hear) what a miracle at once befell there.
This fierce Arcite has taken off his helm,
And on a war horse, to show his face,
He spurs from one end to the other of the large open space
Looking upward upon this Emelye;
And she to him cast a friendly eye
(For women, so to speak in general,
They all follow the favor of Fortune)
And was all his source of pleasure, in his heart.
Out of the ground leaped an infernal fury,
Sent from Pluto at the request of Saturn,
For which his horse for fear began to turn,
And leaped aside, and stumbled as he leaped;
And before Arcite can take heed,
He hit himself on the top of his head,
That in the place he lay as if he were dead,
His breast shattered by his saddlebow.
He lay as black as any coal or crow,
The blood was so run in his face.
Immediately he was carried out of the place,
With painful heart, to Theseus's palace.
Then was he cut out of his armor
And brought in a bed very gently and quickly,
For he was yet conscious and alive,
And always crying for Emelye.
Duke Theseus, with all his company,
Is come home to Athens, his city,
With all bliss and great solemnity.
Although this accident had happened,
He would not distress them all.
People said also that Arcite shall not dye;
He shall be healed of his injuries.
And of another thing they were as happy,
That of them all there was no one slain,
Although they (were) sorely hurt, and especially one,
Whose breastbone was pierced by a spear.
To other wounds and to broken arms
Some had salves, and some had charms;
Medicines made of herbs, and also of sage
They drank, for they wanted to have their limbs cured.
For which this noble duke, as he well knows how,
Comforts and honors every man,
And made revel all the long night
For the foreign lords, as was right.  
Nor was it considered any defeat (in battle)
But (only) as a joust or a tournament;
For truly there was no defeat.
For falling is nothing but an accident,
Nor to be led by force unto the stake
Without having surrendered, and taken by twenty knights,
One person alone, without others,
And dragged forth by arm, foot, and toe,
And also his steed driven forth with staves
By men on foot, both yeomen and also foot soldiers --
He incurred no shameful blame for it; 
No man there may call it cowardice.
For which anon duke Theseus had proclaimed,
To put a stop to all rancor and ill-will,
The victory (is given) as well to one side as to the other,
And either side equal as the other's brother; 
And gave them gifts in accordance with their ranks,
And held a feast for fully three days,
And honorably escorted the kings 
Out of his town a full day's journey.
And home went every man the direct way.
There was no more but "Fare well, have good day!"
Of this battle I will write no more,
But speak of Palamon and of Arcite.
The breast of Arcite swells, and the pain
At his heart increases more and more.
The clotted blood, despite any medical treatment,
Corrupts, and is left in the trunk of his body,
That neither blood letting at a vein, nor applying suction cups,
Nor drink of herbs can be any help to him.
The power expulsive (to expel fluids), or animal,
From that power called natural
Can not remove nor expel the poison.
The pipes of his lungs began to swell,
And every muscle down in his breast
Is destroyed by poison and corrupted matter.
Avails him neither, to preserve his life,
Vomit upward, nor downward laxative.
All is shattered in that region;
Nature now has no power to control. 
And certainly, where Nature will not work,
Fare well medicine! Go bear the man to church!
This is the whole of it, that Arcite must die;
For which he sends after Emelye,
And Palamon, who was his dear cousin.
Then said he thus, as you shall after hear:
"The woeful spirit in my heart can not
Declare one small part of all my painful sorrows
To you, my lady, whom I love most,
But I bequeath the service of my ghost
To you above every creature,
Since my life can no longer endure.
Alas, the woe! Alas, the strong pains,
That I have suffered for you, and so long!
Alas, the death! Alas, my Emelye!
Alas, separation of our company!
Alas, my heart's queen! Alas, my wife,
My heart's lady, ender of my life!
What is this world? What do people ask to have?
Now with his love, now in his cold grave
Alone, without any company.
Fare well, my sweet foe, my Emelye!
And softly take me in your two arms,
For love of God, and listen to what I say.
"I have here with my cousin Palamon
Had strife and rancor many a day ago
For love of you, and for my jealousy.
And as Jupiter may guide my soul,
To speak specifically of a servant (of love),
With all the attendant attributes truly --
That is to say, truth, honor, knighthood,
Wisdom, humbleness, rank, and noble ancestry,
Nobility of character, and all that belongs to that art --
As Jupiter may have concern for my soul,
In this world right now I know no one
So worthy to be loved as Palamon,
Who serves you, and will do so all his life.
And if ever you shall be a wife,   
Forget not Palamon, the gentle man."
And with that word his speech began to fail,
For from his feet up to his breast had come
The cold of death, which had overcome him,
And yet moreover, for in his two arms 
The vital strength is lost and all gone.
Only the intellect, nothing else,
That dwelled in his heart sick and sore,
Began to fail when the heart felt death.
His two eyes grew dark, and his breath failed,
But on his lady yet he cast his eye;
His last word was, "Mercy, Emelye!"
His spirit changed house and went where,
Since I came never (there), I can not tell where.
Therefore I stop; I am no theologian;
I find nothing about souls in this register,  
Nor do I wish to tell such beliefs  
Of them, though they write of where they (the souls) dwell.
Arcite is cold, may Mars guide his soul!
Now will I speak forth of Emelye.
Emelye shrieked, and Palamon howls,
And Theseus immediately took his sister 
Swooning, and carried her away from the corpse.
What helps it to waste the whole day
To tell how she wept both evening and morning?
For in such cases women have such sorrow,
When their husbands are gone from them,
That for the most part they so sorrow,
Or else fall in such illness
That at the last certainly they die.
Infinite are the sorrows and the tears
Of old folk and folk of tender years
In all the town for the death of this Theban.
For him there weep both child and man;
There was no such great weeping, certainly,
When Hector was brought, just recently slain,
To Troy. Alas, the lamentation that was there,
Scratching of cheeks, also tearing of hair.
"Why wouldst thou be dead," these women cry,
"Since thou haddest gold enough, and Emelye?"
No man might comfort Theseus,
Except for his old father Egeus,
Who knew the changes of this world,
As he had seen it change both up and down,
Joy after woe, and woe after gladness,
And showed them examples and comparisons.
"Right as there died never a man," said he,
"Who did not live in earth to some extent
Just so there lived never a man," he said,
"In all this world, who some time did not die.
This world is nothing but a thoroughfare full of woe,
And we are pilgrims, passing to and fro.
Death is an end of every worldly pain."
And beyond all this yet he said much more
To this effect, full wisely to exhort
The people that they should comfort themselves. 
Duke Theseus, with all his careful attention,
Considered now where the tomb
Of good Arcite may best be made,
And also most honorable in (regard to) his rank.
And at the last he concluded
That there where first Arcite and Palamon
Had the battle between them for love,
That in that same grove, sweet-smelling and green, 
Where he had his amorous desires,
His lament, and for love his hot fires,
He would make a fire in which the rite
Of a funeral he might fully perform.
And he ordered immediately to hack and hew
The old oaks, and lay them in a row
In piles arranged to burn well.
His officers with swift feet they run
And ride quickly at his commandment.
And after this, Theseus has sent
For a bier, and it all overspread
With cloth of gold, the richest that he had.
And of the same material he clad Arcite;
Upon his hands he had white gloves,
Also on his head a crown of green laurel,
And in his hand a sword full bright and keen.
He laid him, with the face bare, on the bier;
Therewith he wept that it was a pity to hear.
And in order that all the people should see him,
When it was day, he brought him to the hall,
That resounds with the crying and the sound.
Then came this woeful Theban Palamon,
With waving beard and rough hair sprinkled with ashes,
In black clothes, all sprinkled with tears;  
And, excelling others in weeping, Emelye,
The most pitiful of all the company.
In order that the ritual should be
The more noble and rich in its degree,
Duke Theseus had three steeds brought forth,
That were equipped with trappings of steel all glittering,
And covered with the coat of arms of Don Arcite.
Upon these steeds, that were large and white,
There sat folk, of which one carried his (Arcite's) shield,
Another held his spear upright in his hands,  
The third carried with him his Turkish bow
(Of pure gold was the quiver and also the fittings);
And they rode forth slowly with sorrowful demeanor
Toward the grove, as you shall later hear.
The noblest of the Greeks that were there 
Carried the bier upon their shoulders,
With slow pace and eyes red and wet,
Throughout the city by the main street,
Which was all spread with black, and wonderfully high
The street is covered with exactly the same.
Upon the right hand went old Egeus,
And on that other side duke Theseus,
With vessels of pure gold in their hands,
All full of honey, milk, and blood, and wine;
Also Palamon, with a very large company;
And after that came woeful Emelye,
With fire in hand, as was at that time the custom,
To do the office of funeral service.
Much labor and full great preparation 
Was at the service and the fire-making,
Which with its green top reached the heaven;
And twenty fathom of breadth the sides stretched --
This is to say, the boughs were so broad.
There was first laid very many a load of straw.
But how the fire was made on high,
Nor also the names that the trees are called,
Such as oak, fir, birch, aspen, alder, holm oak, poplar,
Willow, elm, plane, ash, box, chestnut, linden, laurel,
Maple, thorn, beech, hazel, yew, dogwood --
How they were cut down shall not be told by me;
Nor how the gods ran up and down,
Disinherited of their habitation,
In which they dwelt in rest and peace,
Nymphs, fawns and hamadryades (wood nymphs);
Nor how the beasts and the birds all
Fled for fear, when the wood was cut down;
Nor how frightened by the light was the ground,
Which was not accustomed to see the bright sun;
Nor how the fire was laid first with straw,
And then with dry branches cut in thirds,
And then with green wood and mixtures of spices,
And then with cloth of gold and with precious stones
And garlands, hanging with full many a flower;
The myrrh, the incense, with such great fragrance;
Nor how Arcite lay among all this,
Nor what richness about his body is;
Nor how Emelye, as was the custom,
Lighted the fire of funeral service;
Nor how she swooned when men made the fire,
Nor what she spoke, nor what was her desire;
Nor what jewels men threw in the fire,
When the fire was great and burned fast;
Nor how some threw their shields, and some their spears,
And of their vestments, which they wore,
And cups full of wine, and milk, and blood,
Into the fire, that burned as if it were mad;
Nor how the Greeks, with a huge company,
Thrice ride all the fire about
Upon the left hand, with a loud shouting,
And thrice with their spears clattering;
And thrice how the ladies did cry;
And how Emelye was led homeward;
Nor how Arcite is burned to cold ashes;
Nor how that wake was held  
All that same night; nor how the Greeks play
The funeral games I care not to say
Who wrestles best, naked with oil anointed,
Nor who bore him best, in any difficulty.
I will not tell also how they go
Home to Athens, when the games are done;
But shortly to the point then I will go
And make an end of my long tale.
By the course of events and by length of a certain number of years,
All stopped is the mourning and the tears
Of the Greeks, by one general assent.
Then it seemed to me there was a parliament
At Athens, upon certain topics and cases;
Among which topics was discussed (a proposal)
To have alliance with certain countries,
And have fully the submission of the Thebans.
For which this noble Theseus immediately
Ordered (someone) to send for gentle Palamon,
Unknown by him (Palamon) what was the cause and why,
But in his black clothes sorrowfully
He came at his (Theseus's) commandment in haste.
Then Theseus sent for Emelye.
When they were set, and all the place was hushed,
And Theseus had waited for a while
Before any word came from his wise breast,
He set his eyes where his object of desire was.
And with a sad face he sighed softly,
And after that exactly thus he pronounced his decision:
"The First Mover of the First Cause above,
When he first made the faire chain of love,
Great was the effect, and noble was his plan.
Well knew he why, and what thereof he meant,
For with that faire chain of love he bound
The fire, the air, the water, and the land
In definite bounds, from which they may not flee.
That same Prince and that Mover," said he,
"Has established in this wretched world below
Specific (numbers of) days and  (term of) duration
To all that is engendered in this place,
Beyond the which day they can not pass,
Although they may yet well shorten those days.
There is no need to cite any written authority,
For it is proven by experience,
Unless I wish to make my meaning more clear.
Then one can by this order well discern
That that same Mover is stable and eternal.
Well may one know, unless it be a fool,
That every part derives from its whole,
For nature has not taken its beginning
Of no part or portion of a thing,
But of a thing that is complete and stable,
Descending (from that) until it becomes corruptible.
And therefore, by his wise foresight,
He has so well established his plan
That types of being and natural processes
Shall endure (for a set time) one after another,
And not eternally, without any lie.
This thou canst understand and plainly see.
"Lo the oak, that is so slow to mature,
From the time that it first begins to spring,
And has so long a life, as we may see,
Yet at the last the tree is wasted away.
"Consider also how the hard stone
Under our feet, on which we tread and go,
Eventually it is worn away as it lies by the way.
The broad river sometimes grows dry;
We see the great cities grow weak and pass away.
Then you can see that all things have an end.
"Of man and woman also we see well 
That by necessity, in one of these two periods of time --
This is to say, in youth or else in age --
He must be dead, the king as must a servant boy;
One in his bed, one in the deep sea,
One in the large field, as people can see;
Nothing helps there; all goes that same way.
Then may I say that all things must die.
"What causes this but Jupiter, the king,
Who is prince and cause of all things,
Causing all to return to its own origin
From which it is derived, to tell the truth?
And against this no living creature,
Of any rank, is helped by striving.
"Then is it wisdom, as it seems to me,
To make virtue of necessity,
And take it well what we may not escape,
And namely that which is due to us all.
And whoever complains in any way, he does folly,
And is rebel to Him that can rule all.
And certainly a man has most honor
To die in his (time of) excellence and flower,
When he is sure of his good name;
Then he has not done his friend, nor himself, any shame.
And his friend ought to be more pleased with his death,
When his breath is yielded up with honor,
Than when his name is faded because of age,
For all forgotten is his knightly prowess.
Then is it best, for a worthy fame,
To die when he has the most fame.
"The contrary of all this is willfulness.
Why do we complain, why do we have sadness,
That good Arcite, flower of chivalry,
Is departed with all due honor
Out of this foul prison of this life?
Why do his cousin and his wife complain here
Of the welfare of him, who loved them so well?
Can he show them his gratitude? Nay, God knows, not a bit;
They offend both his soul and themselves as well,
And as yet they may not change their desires.
"What  can I conclude of this long argument,
But after woe I advise us to be merry
And thank Jupiter for all his grace?
And before we depart from this place
I advise that we make of two sorrows 
One perfect joy, lasting evermore.
And look now, where most sorrow is herein,
There will we first amend and begin.
"Sister," said he, "this is my full intention,
With all the advice of my parliament here,
That gentle Palamon, your own knight,
Who serves you with will, heart, and might,
And ever has done so since you first knew him,
That you shall of your grace have pity upon him,
And take him for husband and for lord.
Lend me your hand, for this is our decision.
Let your womanly pity now be seen.
He is a king's brother's son, indeed;
And even if he were a poor young knight,
Since he has served you so many a year,
And has had for you such great adversity,
It must be taken in account, believe me,
For gentle mercy ought to prevail over justice."
Then said he thus to Palamon the knight:
"I suppose little preaching is needed here
To make you assent to this thing.
Come near, and take your lady by the hand."
Between them was made right away the bond
That is called matrimony or marriage,
By all the council and the baronage.
And thus with all bliss and festivity
Palamon has wedded Emelye.
And God, who has made all this wide world,
Send him his love who has dearly paid for it;
For now is Palamon in complete happiness,
Living in bliss, in riches, and in health,
And Emelye loves him so tenderly,
And he serves her so gently,
That never was there any word between them 
Of jealousy or any other vexation.
Thus ends Palamon and Emelye;
And God save all this fair company! Amen.
When April with its sweet-smelling showers
Has pierced the drought of March to the root,
And bathed every vein (of the plants) in such liquid
By which power the flower is created;
When the West Wind also with its sweet breath,
In every wood and field has breathed life into 
The tender new leaves, and the young sun
Has run half its course in Aries,
And small fowls make melody,
Those that sleep all the night with open eyes
(So Nature incites them in their hearts),
Then folk long to go on pilgrimages,
And professional pilgrims to seek foreign shores,
To distant shrines, known in various lands;
And specially from every shire's end
Of England to Canterbury they travel,
To seek the holy blessed martyr,
Who helped them when they were sick.
It happened that in that season on one day,
In Southwark at the Tabard Inn as I lay
Ready to go on my pilgrimage
To Canterbury with a very devout spirit,
At night had come into that hostelry
Well nine and twenty in a company
Of various sorts of people, by chance fallen
In fellowship, and they were all pilgrims,
Who intended to ride toward Canterbury.
The bedrooms and the stables were spacious,
And we were well accommodated in the best way.
And in brief, when the sun was (gone) to rest,
I had so spoken with everyone of them 
That I was of their fellowship straightway,
And made agreement to rise early,
To take our way where I (will) tell you.
But nonetheless, while I have time and opportunity,
Before I proceed further in this tale,
It seems to me in accord with reason
To tell you all the circumstances
Of each of them, as it seemed to me,
And who they were, and of what social rank,
And also what clothing that they were in;
And at a knight then will I first begin.
A KNIGHT there was, and that (one was) a worthy man,
Who from the time that he first began
To ride out, he loved chivalry,
Fidelity and good reputation, generosity and courtesy.
He was very worthy in his lord's war,
And for that he had ridden, no man farther,
As well in Christendom as in heathen lands,
And (was) ever honored for his worthiness;
He was at Alexandria when it was won.
He had sat very many times in the place of honor,
Above (knights of) all nations in Prussia;
He had campaigned in Lithuania and in Russia,
No Christian man of his rank so often.
Also he had been in Grenada at the siege 
Of Algeciras, and had ridden in Morocco.
He was at Ayash and at Atalia,
When they were won, and in the Mediterranean
He had been at many a noble expedition.
He had been at fifteen mortal battles,
And fought for our faith at Tlemcen
Three times in formal duels, and each time slain his foe.
This same worthy knight had also been 
At one time with the lord of Balat
Against another heathen in Turkey;
And evermore he had an outstanding reputation
And although he was brave, he was prudent,
And of his deportment as meek as is a maid.
He never yet said any rude word
In all his life unto any sort of person.
He was a truly perfect, noble knight.
But to tell you of his clothing,
His horses were good, but he was not gaily dressed.
He wore a tunic of coarse cloth 
All stained (with rust) by his coat of mail,
For he was recently come (back) from his expedition,
And went to do his pilgrimage.
With him there was his son, a young SQUIRE,
A lover and a lively bachelor,
With locks curled as if they had been laid in a curler.
He was twenty years of age, I guess.
Of his stature he was of moderate height,
And wonderfully agile, and of great strength.
And he had been for a time on a cavalry expedition
In Flanders, in Artois, and Picardy,
And conducted himself well, for so little a space of time,
In hope to stand in his lady's good graces.
He was embroidered, as if it were a mead
All full of fresh flowers, white and red.
Singing he was, or fluting, all the day;
He was as fresh as is the month of May.
His gown was short, with long and wide sleeves.
He well knew how to sit on horse and handsomely ride.
He knew how to make songs and well compose (the words),
Joust and also dance, and well draw and write.
He loved so passionately that at nighttime
He slept no more than does a nightingale.
Courteous he was, humble, and willing to serve,
And carved before his father at the table.
He (the Knight) had A YEOMAN and no more servants 
At that time, for it pleased him so to travel,
And he (the yeoman) was clad in coat and hood of green.
A sheaf of peacock arrows, bright and keen,
He carried under his belt very properly
(He well knew how to care for his equipment as a yeoman should;
His arrows did not fall short because of drooping feathers),
And in his hand he carried a mighty bow.
He had a close-cropped head, with a brown face.
He well knew all the practice of woodcraft.
He wore an elegant archer's wrist-guard upon his arm,
And by his side a sword and a small shield,
And on that other side an elegant dagger
Well ornamented and sharp as the point of a spear;
A Christopher-medal of bright silver on his breast.
He carried a horn, the shoulder strap was green;
He was a forester, truly, as I guess.
There was also a Nun, a PRIORESS,
Who was very simple and modest in her smiling;
Her greatest oath was but by Saint Loy;
And she was called Madam Eglantine.
She sang the divine service very well,
Intoned in her nose in a very polite manner;
And she spoke French very well and elegantly,
In the manner of Stratford at the Bow,
For French of Paris was to her unknown.
At meals she was well taught indeed;
She let no morsel fall from her lips,
Nor wet her fingers deep in her sauce;
She well knew how to carry a morsel (to her mouth) and take good care
That no drop fell upon her breast.
Her greatest pleasure was in good manners.
She wiped her upper lip so clean
That in her cup there was seen no tiny bit 
Of grease, when she had drunk her drink.
She reached for her food in a very seemly manner.
And surely she was of excellent deportment,
And very pleasant, and amiable in demeanor,
And she took pains to imitate the manners
Of court, and to be dignified in behavior,
And to be considered worthy of reverence.
But to speak of her moral sense,
She was so charitable and so compassionate
She would weep, if she saw a mouse
Caught in a trap, if it were dead or bled.
She had some small hounds that she fed
With roasted meat, or milk and fine white bread.
But sorely she wept if one of them were dead,
Or if someone smote it smartly with a stick;
And all was feeling and tender heart.
Her wimple was pleated in a very seemly manner,
Her nose well formed, her eyes gray as glass,
Her mouth very small, and moreover soft and red.
But surely she had a fair forehead;
It was almost nine inches broad, I believe;
For, certainly, she was not undergrown.
Her cloak was very well made , as I was aware.
About her arm she bore of small coral 
A set of beads, adorned with large green beads,
And thereon hung a brooch of very bright gold,
On which there was first written an A with a crown,
And after "Love conquers all."
She had another NUN with her,
Who was her secretary, and three priests.
There was a MONK, an extremely fine one,
An outrider (a monk with business outside the monastery), who loved hunting,
A virile man, qualified to be an abbot.
He had very many fine horses in his stable,
And when he rode, one could hear his bridle
Jingle in a whistling wind as clear
And also as loud as does the chapel belle
Where this lord was prior of the subordinate monastery.
The rule of Saint Maurus or of Saint Benedict --
Because it was old and somewhat strict
This same Monk let old things pass away,
And followed the broader customs of modern times.
He gave not a plucked hen for that text
That says that hunters are not holy men,
Nor that a monk, when he is heedless of rules,
Is like a fish that is out of water --
This is to say, a monk out of his cloister.
But he considered that same text not worth an oyster;
And I said his opinion was good.
Why should he study and make himself crazy,
Always to pore upon a book in the cloister,
Or work with his hands, and labor,
As Augustine commands? How shall the world be served?
Let Augustine have his work reserved to him!
Therefore he was indeed a vigorous horseman:
He had greyhounds as swift as fowl in flight;
Of tracking and of hunting for the hare
Was all his pleasure, by no means would he refrain from it.
I saw his sleeves lined at the hand
With squirrel fur, and that the finest in the land;
And to fasten his hood under his chin,
He had a very skillfully made pin of gold;
There was an elaborate knot in the larger end.
His head was bald, which shone like any glass,
And his face did too, as if he had been rubbed with oil.
He was a very plump lord and in good condition;
His eyes were prominent, and rolling in his head,
Which gleamed like a furnace under a cauldron;
His boots supple, his horse in excellent condition.
Now certainly he was a handsome ecclesiastical dignitary;
He was not pale as a tormented spirit.
A fat swan loved he best of any roast.
His saddle horse was as brown as is a berry.
There was a FRIAR, a pleasure-loving and merry one,
A limiter (with an assigned territory), a very solemn man.
In all the four orders of friars is no one that knows
So much of sociability and elegant speech.
He had made very many a marriage
Of young women at his own cost.
He was a noble supporter of his order.
Very well beloved and familiar was he
With landowners every where in his country,
And also with worthy women of the town;
For he had power of confession,
As he said himself, more than a parish priest,
For he was licensed by his order.
He heard confession very sweetly,
And his absolution was pleasant:
He was a lenient man in giving penance,
Where he knew he would have a good gift.
For to give to a poor order (of friars)
Is a sign that a man is well confessed;
For if he gave, he (the friar) dared to assert,
He knew that a man was repentant;
For many a man is so hard in his heart,
He can not weep, although he painfully suffers.
Therefore instead of weeping and prayers
One may give silver to the poor friars.
His hood was always stuffed full of knives
And pins, to give to fair wives.
And certainly he had a merry voice:
He well knew how to sing and play on a rote (string instrument);
He absolutely took the prize for reciting ballads.
His neck was white as a lily flower;
Furthermore he was strong as a champion fighter.
He knew the taverns well in every town
And every innkeeper and barmaid
Better than a leper or a beggar-woman,
For unto such a worthy man as he
It was not suitable, in view of his official position,
To have acquaintance with sick lepers.
It is not respectable; it can not be profitable,
To deal with any such poor people,
But all with rich people and sellers of victuals.
And every where, where profit should arise,
He was courteous and graciously humble;
There was no man anywhere so capable (of such work).
He was the best beggar in his house;
[And he gave a certain fee for his grant (of begging rights);
None of his brethren came there in his territory;]
For though a widow had not a shoe,
So pleasant was his "In the beginning,"
Yet he would have a farthing, before he went away.
His total profit was much more than his proper income.
And he knew how to frolic, as if he were indeed a pup.
He knew how to be much help on days for resolving disputes,
For there he was not like a cloistered monk
With a threadbare cope, like a poor scholar,
But he was like a master of arts or a pope.
Of wide (expensive) cloth was his short cloak,
Which was round as a bell fresh from the clothespress.
Somewhat he lisped, for his affectation,
To make his English sweet upon his tongue;
And in his harping, when he had sung,
His eyes twinkled in his head exactly
As do the stars in the frosty night.
This worthy friar was called Huberd.
There was a MERCHANT with a forked beard,
Wearing parti-colored cloth, and proudly he sat on his horse;
Upon his head (he wore a) Flemish beaver hat,
His boots were buckled handsomely and elegantly.
His opinions he spoke very solemnly,
Concerning always the increase of his profits.
He wanted the sea to be guarded at all costs
Between Middelburgh (Holland) and Orwell (England).
He well knew how to deal in foreign currencies.
This worthy man employed his wit very well:
There was no one who knew that he was in debt,
He was so dignified in managing his affairs
With his buying and selling and with his financial deals.
Truly, he was a worthy man indeed,
But, to say the truth, I do not know what men call him.
There was also a CLERK (scholar) from Oxford,
Who long before had begun the study of logic.
His horse was as lean as is a rake,
And he was not very fat, I affirm,
But looked emaciated, and moreover abstemious.
His short overcoat was very threadbare,
For he had not yet obtained an ecclesiastical living,
Nor was he worldly enough to take secular employment.
For he would rather have at the head of his bed
Twenty books, bound in black or red,
Of Aristotle and his philosophy
Than rich robes, or a fiddle, or an elegant psaltery. 
But even though he was a philosopher,
Nevertheless he had but little gold in his strongbox;
But all that he could get from his friends,
He spent on books and on learning,
And diligently did pray for the souls 
Of those who gave him the wherewithal to attend the schools.
He took most care and paid most heed to study.
He spoke not one word more than was needed,
And that was said with due formality and respect,
And short and lively and full of elevated content;
His speech was consonant with moral virtue,
And gladly would he learn and gladly teach.
A SERGEANT OF THE LAW (high-ranking attorney), prudent and wise,
Who often had been at the Porch of St. Paul's (where lawyers gather)
Was also there, very rich in superior qualities.
He was judicious and of great dignity --
He seemed such, his words were so wise.
He was very often a judge in the court of assizes,
By royal appointment and with full jurisdiction.
For his knowledge and for his excellent reputation,
He had many grants of yearly income.
There was nowhere so great a land-buyer:
In fact, all was unrestricted possession to him;
His purchasing could not be invalidated.
There was nowhere so busy a man as he, 
And yet he seemed busier than he was.
He had in Year Books all the cases and decisions
That from the time of king William have occurred.
Furthermore, he knew how to compose and draw up a legal document,
So that no one could find a flaw in his writing;
And he knew every statute completely by heart.
He rode but simply in a parti-colored coat,
Girded with a belt of silk, with small stripes;
I tell no longer tale of his clothing.
A FRANKLIN was in his company.
His beard was white as a daisy;
As to his temperament, he was dominated by the humor blood.
He well loved a bit of bread dipped in wine in the morning;
His custom was always to live in delight,
For he was Epicurus' own son,
Who held the opinion that pure pleasure 
Was truly perfect happiness.
He was a householder, and a great one at that;
He was Saint Julian (patron of hospitality) in his country.
His bread, his ale, was always of the same (good) quality;
Nowhere was there any man better stocked with wine.
His house was never without baked pies
Of fish and meat, and that so plentiful
That in his house it snowed with food and drink;
Of all the dainties that men could imagine,
In accord with the various seasons of the year,
So he varied his midday meal and his supper.
He had very many fat partridges in pens,
And many a bream and many a pike in his fish pond.
Woe was his cook unless his sauce was
Hotly spiced and sharp, and ready all his cooking equipment.
In his hall his dining table always
Stood covered (with table cloth) and ready all the long day.
He presided as lord and sire at court sessions;
He was a member of parliament many times.
A dagger and a purse all of silk
Hung at his belt, white as morning milk.
He had been a sheriff, and an auditor of taxes.
There was nowhere such a worthy landowner.
A HABERDASHER and a CARPENTER,
A WEAVER, a DYER, and a TAPESTRY-MAKER --
And they were all clothed in one livery
Of a solemn and a great parish guild.
Their equipment was adorned all freshly and new;
Their knives were not mounted with brass
But entirely with silver, wrought very neatly and well,
Their belts and their purses every bit.
Each of them well seemed a solid citizen
To sit on a dais in a city hall.
Every one of them, for the wisdom that he knows,
Was suitable to be an alderman.
For they had enough possessions and income,
And also their wives would well assent to it;
And otherwise certainly they would be to blame.
It is very fine to be called "my lady,"
And go to feasts on holiday eves heading the procession,
And have a gown with a train royally carried.
A COOK they had with them for the occasion
To boil the chickens with the marrow bones,
And tart poudre-marchant and galingale (spices).
He well knew how to judge a draft of London ale.
He knew how to roast, and boil, and broil, and fry,
Make stews, and well bake a pie.
But it was a great harm, as it seemed to me,
That he had an open sore on his shin.
As for white pudding, he made that of the best quality.
A SHIPMAN was there, dwelling far in the west;
For all I know, he was from Dartmouth.
He rode upon a cart horse, insofar as he knew how,
In a gown of woolen cloth (that reached) to the knee.
He had a dagger hanging on a cord 
About his neck, down under his arm.
The hot summer had made his hue all brown;
And certainly he was a boon companion.
He had drawn very many a draft of wine
While coming from Bordeaux, while the merchant slept.
He had no concern for a scrupulous conscience.
If he fought and had the upper hand,
He sent them home by water to every land (they walked the plank). 
But of his skill to reckon well his tides,
His currents, and his perils near at hand,
His harbors, and positions of his moon, his navigation,
There was none other such from Hull to Cartagena (Spain).
He was bold and prudent in his undertakings;
His beard had been shaken by many a tempest.
He knew all the harbors, how they were,
From Gotland to the Cape of Finisterre,
And every inlet in Brittany and in Spain.
His ship was called the Maudelayne.
With us there was a DOCTOR OF MEDICINE
In all this world there was no one like him,
To speak of medicine and of surgery,
For he was instructed in astronomy.
He took care of his patient very many times
In (astronomically suitable) hours by (use of) his natural science.
He well knew how to calculate the planetary position
Of his astronomical talismans for his patient.
He knew the cause of every malady,
Were it of hot, or cold, or moist, or dry elements,
And where they were engendered, and by what bodily fluid.
He was a truly, perfect practitioner:
The cause known, and the source of his (patient's) harm,
Straightway he gave the sick man his remedy.
He had his apothecaries all ready 
To send him drugs and his electuaries,
For each of them made the other to profit --
Their friendship was not recently begun.
He well knew the old Aesculapius,
And Dioscorides, and also Rufus,
Old Hippocrates, Haly, and Galen,
Serapion, Rhazes, and Avicenna,
Averroes, John the Damascan, and Constantine,
Bernard, and Gaddesden, and Gilbertus.
He was moderate in his diet,
For it was of no excess,
But greatly nourishing and digestible.
His study was but little on the Bible.
He was clad all in red and in blue,
Lined with taffeta and with silk.
And yet he was moderate in spending;
He kept what he earned in (times of) plague.
Since in medicine gold is a restorative for the heart,
Therefore he loved gold in particular.
There was a good WIFE OF beside BATH,
But she was somewhat deaf, and that was a pity.
She had such a skill in cloth-making 
She surpassed them of Ypres and of Ghent.
In all the parish there was no wife 
Who should go to the Offering before her;
And if there did, certainly she was so angry
That she was out of all charity (love for her neighbor).
Her kerchiefs were very fine in texture;
I dare swear they weighed ten pound
That on a Sunday were upon her head.
Her stockings were of fine scarlet red,
Very closely laced, and shoes very supple and new.
Bold was her face, and fair, and red of hue.
She was a worthy woman all her life:
She had (married) five husbands at the church door,
Not counting other company in youth --
But there is no need to speak of that right now.
And she had been three times at Jerusalem;
She had passed many a foreign sea;
She had been at Rome, and at Boulogne,
In Galicia at Saint-James (of Compostella), and at Cologne.
She knew much about wandering by the way.
She had teeth widely set apart, truly to say.
She sat easily upon a pacing horse,
Wearing a large wimple, and on her head a hat
As broad as a buckler or a shield;
An overskirt about her large hips,
And on her feet a pair of sharp spurs.
In fellowship she well knew how to laugh and chatter.
She knew, as it happened, about remedies for love 
For she knew the old dance (tricks of the trade) of that art.
A good man was there of religion,
And (he) was a poor PARSON OF A TOWN,
But he was rich in holy thought and work.
He was also a learned man, a scholar,
Who would preach Christ's gospel truly;
He would devoutly teach his parishioners.
He was gracious, and wonderfully diligent,
And very patient in adversity,
And such he was proven many times.
He was very reluctant to excommunicate for (nonpayment of) his tithes,
But rather would he give, there is no doubt,
Unto his poor parishioners about
Some of his offering (received at mass) and also some of his income.
He knew how to have sufficiency in few possessions.
His parish was wide, and houses far apart,
But he did not omit, for rain nor thunder,
In sickness or in trouble to visit
Those living farthest away in his parish, high-ranking and low,
Going by foot, and in his hand a staff.
He gave this noble example to his sheep,
That first he wrought, and afterward he taught.
He took those words out of the gospel,
And this metaphor he added also to that,
That if gold rust, what must iron do?
For if a priest, on whom we trust, should be foul
It is no wonder for a layman to go bad;
And it is a shame, if a priest is concerned:
A shit-stained shepherd and a clean sheep.
Well ought a priest to give an example,
By his purity, how his sheep should live.
He did not rent out his benefice (ecclesiastical living)
And leave his sheep encumbered in the mire
And run to London unto Saint Paul's
To seek an appointment as a chantry priest (praying for a patron)
Or to be hired (as a chaplain) by a guild;
But dwelt at home, and kept well his sheep fold (parish),
So that the wolf did not make it go wrong;
He was a shepherd and not a hireling.
And though he was holy and virtuous,
He was not scornful to sinful men,
Nor domineering nor haughty in his speech,
But in his teaching courteous and kind.
To draw folk to heaven by gentleness,
By good example, this was his business.
Unless it were an obstinate person,
Whoever he was, of high or low rank,
He would rebuke him sharply at that time. 
I believe that nowhere is there a better priest.
He expected no pomp and ceremony,
Nor made himself an overly fastidious conscience,
But Christ's teaching and His twelve apostles 
He taught; but first he followed it himself.
With him there was a PLOWMAN, who was his brother,
Who had hauled very many a cartload of dung;
He was a true and good worker,
Living in peace and perfect love.
He loved God best with all his whole heart
At all times, whether it pleased or pained him,
And then (he loved) his neighbor exactly as himself.
He would thresh, and moreover make ditches and dig,
For Christ's sake, for every poor person,
Without payment, if it lay in his power.
He paid his tithes completely and well,
Both of  his own labor and of his possessions.
He rode in a tabard (sleeveless jacket) upon a mare.
There was also a REEVE, and a MILLER,
A SUMMONER, and a PARDONER also,
A MANCIPLE, and myself -- there were no more.
The MILLER was a stout fellow indeed;
He was very strong of muscle, and also of bones.
That was well proven, for wherever he came,
At wrestling he would always take the the prize.
He was stoutly built, broad, a large-framed fellow;
There was no door that he would not heave off its hinges,
Or break it by running at it with his head.
His beard was red as any sow or fox,
And moreover broad, as though it were a spade.
Upon the exact top of his nose he had
A wart, and thereon stood a tuft of hairs,
Red as the bristles of a sow's ears;
His nostrils were black and wide.
He wore a sword and a buckler by his side.
His mouth was as large as a large furnace.
He was a loudmouth and a buffoon,
And that was mostly of sin and deeds of harlotry.
He well knew how to steal corn and take payment three times;
And yet he had a thumb of gold, indeed.
He wore a white coat and a blue hood.
He well knew how to blow and play a bag-pipe,
And with that he brought us out of town.
There was a fine MANCIPLE of a temple (law school),
Of whom buyers of provisions might take example
For how to be wise in buying of victuals;
For whether he paid (cash) or took (goods) on credit,
Always he watched so (carefully for his opportunity) in his purchases
That he was always ahead and in good state.
Now is not that a very fair grace of God 
That such an unlearned man's wit shall surpass
The wisdom of a heap of learned men?
He had more than three times ten masters,
Who were expert and skillful in law,
Of whom there were a dozen in that house
Worthy to be stewards of rent and land
Of any lord that is in England,
To make him live by his own wealth
In honor and debtless (unless he were crazy),
Or live as economically as it pleased him to desire;
And (they would be) able to help all a shire
In any emergency that might occur or happen.
And yet this Manciple fooled them all.
The REEVE was a slender choleric man.
His beard was shaved as close as ever he can;
His hair was closely cropped by his ears;
The top of his head in front was cut short like a priest's.
His legs were very long and very lean,
Like a stick; there was no calf to be seen.
He well knew how to keep a granary and a storage bin;
There was no auditor who could earn anything (by catching him).
He well knew by the drought and by the rain
(What would be) the yield of his seed and of his grain.
His lord's sheep, his cattle, his herd of dairy cows,
His swine, his horses, his livestock, and his poultry
Was wholly in this Reeve's control,
And in accord with his contract he gave the reckoning,
Since his lord was twenty years of age.
There was no man who could find him in arrears.
There was no farm manager, nor herdsman, nor other servant,
Whose trickery and treachery he did not know;
They were afraid of him as of the plague.
His dwelling was very nicely situated upon an heath;
His place was shaded by green trees.
He could buy property better than his lord could.
He was secretly very richly provided.
He well knew how to please his lord subtly,
By giving and lending him some of his lord's own possessions,
And have thanks, and also a coat and hood (as a reward).
In youth he had learned a good craft:
He was a very good craftsman, a carpenter.
This Reeve sat upon a very good horse
That was all dapple gray and was called Scot.
He had on a long outer coat of dark blue,
And by his side he wore a rusty sword.
Of Northfolk was this Reeve of whom I tell,
Near to a town men call Bawdeswelle.
He had his coat hitched up and belted, like a friar,
And ever he rode as the last of our company.
There was a SUMMONER with us in that place,
Who had a fire-red cherubim's face,
For it was pimpled and discolored, with swollen eyelids.
He was as hot and lecherous as a sparrow,
With black, scabby brows and a beard with hair fallen out.
Children were afraid of his face.
There was no mercury, lead monoxide, nor sulphur,
Borax, white lead, nor any oil of tarter,
Nor ointment that would cleanse and burn,
That could cure him of his white pustules,
Nor of the knobs sitting on his cheeks.
He well loved garlic, onions, and also leeks,
And to drink strong wine, red as blood;
Then he would speak and cry out as if he were crazy.
And when he had drunk deeply of the wine,
Then he would speak no word but Latin.
He had a few legal terms, two or three,
That he had learned out of some text of ecclesiastical law --
That is no wonder, he heard it all the day;
And also you know well how a jay
Can call out "Walter" as well as the pope can.
But whoever knew how to examine him in other matters,
(Would find that) he had used up all his learning;
Always "The question is, what point of the law applies?" he would cry.
He was a fine rascal and a kind one;
One could not find a better fellow.
For a quart of wine he would allow
A good fellow to have his concubine
For twelve months, and excuse him completely;
Secretly he also knew how to pull off a clever trick.
And if he found anywhere a good fellow,
He would teach him to have no awe
Of the archdeacon's curse (of excommunication) in such a case,
Unless a man's soul were in his purse;
For in his purse he would be punished.
"Purse is the archdeacon's hell," he said.
But well I know he lied right certainly;
Each guilty man ought to be afraid of excommunication,
For excommunication will slay just as forgiveness saves,
And let him also beware of a Significavit (order for imprisonment).
In his control he had as he pleased
The young people of the diocese,
And knew their secrets, and was the adviser of them all.
He had set a garland upon his heed,
As large as if it were for the sign of a tavern
He had made himself a shield of a cake.
With him there rode a fine PARDONER
Of Rouncivale, his friend and his companion,
Who had come straight from the court of Rome.
Very loud he sang "Come hither, love, to me!"
This Summoner harmonized with him in a strong bass;
There was never a trumpet of half so great a sound.
This Pardoner had hair as yellow as wax,
But smooth it hung as does a clump of flax;
By small strands hung such locks as he had,
And he spread them over his shoulders;
But thin it lay, by strands one by one.
But to make an attractive appearance, he wore no hood,
For it was trussed up in his knapsack.
It seemed to him that he rode in the very latest style;
With hair unbound, save for his cap, he rode all bare-headed.
He had glaring eyes such as has a hare.
He had sewn a Veronica upon his cap.
Before him in his lap, (he had) his knapsack, 
Brimful of pardons come all fresh from Rome.
He had a voice as small as a goat has.
He had no beard, nor never would have;
It (his face) was as smooth as if it were recently shaven.
I believe he was a eunuch or a homosexual.
But as to his craft, from Berwick to Ware
There was no other pardoner like him.
For in his pouch he had a pillow-case,
Which he said was Our Lady's veil;
He said he had a piece of the sail
That Saint Peter had, when he went
Upon the sea, until Jesus Christ took him.
He had a cross of latten (brass-like alloy) covered with stones,
And in a glass container he had pigs' bones.
But with these relics, when he found
A poor parson dwelling in the countryside,
In one day he got himself more money
Than the parson got in two months;
And thus, with feigned flattery and tricks,
He made fools of the parson and the people.
But truly to tell at the last,
He was in church a noble ecclesiast.
He well knew how to read a lesson or a story,
But best of all he sang an Offertory;
For he knew well, when that song was sung,
He must preach and well smooth his speech
To win silver, as he very well knew how; 
Therefore he sang the more merrily and loud.
Now have I told you truly, briefly,
The rank, the dress, the number, and also the cause
Why this company was assembled 
In Southwark at this fine hostelry
That is called the Tabard, close by the Bell.
But now it is time to tell to you 
How we conducted ourselves that same night,
When we had arrived in that hostelry;
And after that I will tell of our journey
And all the rest of our pilgrimage.
But first I pray yow, of your courtesy,
That you do not attribute it to my rudeness,
Though I speak plainly in this matter,
To tell you their words and their behavior,
Nor though I speak their words accurately.
For this you know as well as I:
Whoever must repeat a story after someone,
He must repeat as closely as ever he knows how
Every single word, if it be in his power,
Although he may speak ever so rudely and freely,
Or else he must tell his tale inaccurately,
Or make up things, or find new words.
He may not refrain from (telling the truth), although he were his brother;
He must as well say one word as another.
Christ himself spoke very plainly in holy writ,
And you know well it is no rudeness.
Also Plato says, whosoever knows how to read him,
The words must be closely related to the deed.
Also I pray you to forgive it to me,
Although I have not set folk in order of their rank
Here in this tale, as they should stand.
My wit is short, you can well understand.
Our Host made great hospitality to everyone of us,
And to the supper he set us straightway.
He served us with victuals of the best sort;
The wine was strong, and it well pleased us to drink.
OUR HOST was an impressive man indeed
(Qualified) to be a master of ceremonies in a hall.
He was a large man with prominent eyes --
There was no better business man in Cheapside --
Bold of his speech, and wise, and well mannered,
And he lacked nothing at all of the qualities proper to a man.
Also moreover he was a right merry man;
And after supper he began to be merry,
And spoke of mirth among other things,
When we had paid our bills,
And said thus: "Now, gentlemen, truly,
You are right heartily welcome to me;
For by my word, if I shall not lie (I must say),
I saw not this year so merry a company
At one time in this lodging as is (here) now.
I would gladly make you happy, if I knew how.
And I have just now thought of an amusement,
To give you pleasure, and it shall cost nothing.
"You go to Canterbury -- God give you success,
May the blessed martyr give you your reward!
And well I know, as you go by the way,
You intend to tell tales and to amuse yourselves;
For truly, it is no comfort nor mirth
To ride by the way dumb as a stone;
And therefore I will make a game for you,
As I said before, and provide you some pleasure.
And if pleases you all unanimously
To be subject to my judgment,
And to do as I shall tell you,
Tomorrow, when you ride by the way,
Now, by the soul of my father who is dead,
Unless you be merry, I will give you my head!
Hold up your hands, without more speech."
Our decision was not long to seek out.
It seemed to us it was not worthwhile to deliberate on it,
And (we) granted his request without more discussion,
And asked him to say his decision as it pleased him.
"Gentlemen," said he, "now listen for the best course of action;
But, I pray yow, do not take it in disdain (scorn it).
This is the point, to speak briefly and clearly,
That each of yow, to make our way seem short by this means,
Must tell two tales in this journey
On the way to Canterbury, that is what I mean,
And on the homeward trip he shall tell two others,
About adventures that in old times have happened.
And whoever of you who does best of all --
That is to say, who tells in this case
Tales of best moral meaning and most pleasure --
Shall have a supper at the cost of us all
Here in this place, sitting by this post,
When we come back from Canterbury.
And to make you the more merry,
I will myself gladly ride with you,
Entirely at my own cost, and be your guide;
And whosoever will not accept my judgment 
Shall pay all that we spend by the way.
And if you grant that it be so,
Tell me straightway, without more words,
And I will get ready early for this."
This thing was granted, and our oaths sworn
With very glad hearts, and (we) prayed him also
That he would consent to do so,
And that he would be our governor,
And judge and score keeper of our tales,
And set a supper at a certain price,
And we will be ruled as he wishes
In every respect; and thus unanimously
We are accorded to his judgment.
And thereupon the wine was fetched immediately;
We drank, and each one went to rest,
Without any longer tarrying.
In the morning, when day began to spring,
Our Host arose, and was the rooster of us all (awakened us).
And gathered us together all in a flock,
And forth we rode at little more than a walk
Unto the Watering of Saint Thomas;
And there our Host stopped his horse
And said, "Gentlemen, listen, if you please.
You know your agreement, and I remind you of it.
If what you said last night agrees with what you say this morning, 
Let's see now who shall tell the first tale.
As ever I may drink wine or ale,
Whosoever may be rebel to my judgment
Shall pay for all that is spent by the way.
Now draw straws, before we depart further (from London);
He who has the shortest shall begin.
Sir Knight," said he, "my master and my lord,
Now draw a straw, for that is my decision.
Come nearer," he said, "my lady Prioress.
And you, sir Clerk, let be your modesty,
And study not; lay hand to (draw a straw), every man!"
Every person began straightway to draw,
And shortly to tell as it was,
Were it by chance, or destiny, or luck,
The truth is this: the draw fell to the Knight,
For which everyone was very happy and glad,
And he must tell his tale, as was reasonable,
By our previous promise and by formal agreement,
As you have heard; what more words are needed?
And when this good man saw that it was so,
Like one who was wise and obedient
To keep his agreement by his free assent,
He said, "Since I must begin the game,
What! Welcome be the draw, in God's name!
Now let us ride, and listen to what I say."
And with that word we rode forth on our way,
And he began with a truly merry demeanor
To tell his tale straightway, and said as you may hear.
When the Knight had thus told his tale,
In all the company there was no one young nor old
Who did not say it was a noble story
And worthy to draw into memory,
And especially the gentlefolk every one.
Our Host laughed and swore, "As I may move about (I swear),
This goes well; the bag is opened.
Let's see now who shall tell another tale;
For truly the game is well begun.
Now tell you, sir Monk, if you can,
Something to equal the Knight's tale."
The Miller, who for drunkenness was all pale,
So that he hardly sat upon his horse,
He would not doff neither hood nor hat,
Nor give preference to any man out of courtesy,
But in Pilate's voice he began to cry,
And swore, "By (Christ's) arms, and by blood and bones,
I know a noble tale for this occasion,
With which I will now requite the Knight's tale."
Our Host saw that he was drunk on ale,
And said, "Wait, Robin, my dear brother;
Some better man shall first tell us another.
Wait, and let us act properly."
"By God's soul," said he, "that will not I;
For I will speak or else go my way."
Our Host answered, "Tell on, in the devil's name!
Thou art a fool; thy wit is overcome."
"Now listen," said the Miller, "everyone!
But first I make a protestation
That I am drunk; I know it by my sound.
And therefore if that I misspeak or say (amiss),
Blame it on ale of Southwerk, I you pray.
For I will tell a legend and a life
Both of a carpenter and of his wife,
How a clerk has set the carpenter's cap (fooled him)."
The Reeve answered and said, "Hold your tongue!
Let be thy ignorant drunken ribaldry.
It is a sin and also a great folly
To slander any man, or defame him,
And also to bring wives in such ill fame.
Thou canst say enough about other things."
This drunken Miller spoke very quickly in reply
And said, "Dear brother Oswald,
He who has no wife, he is no cuckold.
But I say not therefore that thou art one;
There are very good wives, many a one,
And ever a thousand good against one bad.
Thou knowest that well thyself, unless thou art mad.
Why art thou angry with my tale now?
I have a wife, by God, as well as thou;
Yet I would not, for the oxen in my plow,
Take upon me more than enough (trouble),
As to believe of myself that I were one (a cuckold);
I will believe well that I am not one.
A husband must not be inquisitive
Of God's secrets, nor of his wife.
So long as he can find God's plenty there,
Of the rest he needs not enquire."
What more should I say, but this Miller
He would not refrain from speaking for any man,
But told his churl's tale in his manner.
I regret that I must repeat it here.
And therefore every respectable person I pray,
For God's love, think not that I speak
Out of evil intention, but because I must repeat
All their tales, be they better or worse,
Or else (I must) falsify some of my material.
And therefore, whoever does not want to hear it,
Turn over the leaf and choose another tale;
For he shall find enough, of every sort,
Of historical matter that concerns nobility,
And also morality and holiness.
Blame not me if you choose amiss.
The Miller is a churl; you know this well.
So was the Reeve also and many others,
And ribaldry they told, both of the two.
Think about this, and don't blame me;
And also people should not take a joke too seriously.
There was once dwelling at Oxford
A rich churl, who took in boarders,
And of his craft he was a carpenter.
With him there was dwelling a poor scholar,
Who had learned the arts curriculum, but all his desire
Was turned to learning astrology,
And he knew a certain (number of) of astronomical operations,
To determine by scientific calculations,
If men asked him, in specific (astronomical) hours
When men should have drought or else showers,
Or if people asked him what should happen
Concerning every thing; I can not reckon them all.
This clerk was called clever Nicholas.
Of secret love he knew and of its satisfaction;
And moreover he was sly and very discreet,
And like a maiden meek in appearance.
A room had he in that hostelry
Alone, without any company,
Very elegantly strewn with sweet-smelling herbs;
And he himself as sweet as is the root
Of licorice or any zedoary (a ginger-like herb).
His Almagest, and books large and small,
His astrolabe, belonging to his art (of astronomy),
His counting stones (for his abacus) lie neatly apart,
Arranged on shelves at his bed's head;
His linen press covered with a red woolen cloth;
And all above there lay a fine psaltery,
On which at night he made melody
So sweetly that all the room rang;
And "The Angel to the Virgin" he sang;
And after that he sang the King's Tune.
Very often his merry throat was blessed.
And thus this sweet clerk spent his time 
Living on his friends' support and his (own) income.
This carpenter had recently wedded a wife,
Whom he loved more than his life;
She was eighteen years of age.
Jealous he was, and held her narrowly in confinement,
For she was wild and young, and he was old
And believed himself likely to be a cuckold.
He knew not Cato, for his wit was rude,
Who advised that man should wed his equal.
Men should wed according to their status in life,
For youth and old age are often in conflict.
But since he was fallen in the snare,
He must endure, like other folk, his troubles.
Fair was this young wife, and moreover
As any weasel was her body graceful and slender.
A belt she wore, with decorative strips all of silk,
An apron as white as morning milk
Upon her loins, full of many a flounce.
White was her smock, and embroidered all in front
And also behind, around her collar,
With coal-black silk, within and also without.
The ribbons of her white cap
Were of the same color as her collar;
Her headband broad of silk, and set very high.
And surely she had a wanton eye;
Her two eyebrows were plucked very thin,
And those were bent and black as any sloe.
She was much more blissful to look upon
Than is the new early-ripe pear tree,
And softer than the wool is of a sheep.
And by her girdle hung a purse of leather,
Tasseled with silk and ornamented with latten "pearls."
In all this world, to seek up and down,
There is no man so wise that he could imagine
So lovely a little doll or such a wench.
Much brighter was the shining of her complexion
Than the newly minted noble in the Tower.
But of her song, it was as loud and lively
As any swallow sitting on a barn.
Moreover she could skip and play,
Like any kid or calf following its mother.
Her mouth was sweet as ale and honey or mead,
Or a hoard of apples laid in hay or heather.
Skittish she was, as is a spirited colt,
Tall as a mast, and straight as an arrow.
A brooch she wore upon her low collar,
As broad as is the boss of a shield.
Her shoes were laced high on her legs.
She was a primrose, a pig's eye (a flower),
For any lord to lay in his bed,
Or yet for any good yeoman to wed.   
Now, sir, and again, sir, it so happened
That one day this clever Nicholas
Happened with this young wife to flirt and play,
While her husband was at Oseneye,
For clerks are very subtle and very clever;
And intimately he caught her by her crotch,
And said, "Indeed, unless I have my will,
For secret love of thee, sweetheart, I die."
And held her hard by the thigh,
And said, "Sweetheart, love me immediately
Or I will die, so save me God!"
And she sprang as a colt does when restrained,
And with her head she twisted fast away,
And said, "I will not kiss thee, by my faith!
Why, let me be!" said she. "Let me be, Nicholas,
Or I will cry `out, help' and `alas'!
Take away your hands, for your courtesy!"
This Nicholas began to cry for mercy,
And spoke so fair, and pressed his suit so fast,
That she granted him her love at the last,
And swore her oath, by Saint Thomas of Kent,
That she will be at his commandment,
When she may well espy her opportunity.
"My husband is so full of jealousy
That unless you wait patiently and are secretive,
I know right well I am as good as dead," said she.
"You must been very secret in this matter."
"No, care thee not about that," said Nicholas.
"A clerk had badly wasted his time (studying),
If he could not outwit a carpenter."
And thus they are agreed and sworn
To wait for a time, as I have told before.
When Nicholas had done thus every bit
And well patted her about the loins,
He kissed her sweetly and takes his psaltery,
And plays fast, and makes melody.
Then it thus happened, that to the parish church,
Christ's own works to do,
This good wife went on a holiday.
Her forehead shone as bright as any day,
It was so washed when she left her work.
Now was there of that church a parish clerk,
Who was called Absolon.
Curly was his hair, and as the gold it shone,
And stretched out like a fan large and broad;
Very straight and even lay his elegant parted hair.
His complexion was ruddy, his eyes gray as a goose.
With St. Paul's window carved on his shoes,
In red hose he went elegantly.
Clad he was very trimly and properly
All in a tunic of a light blue;
Very fair and thick are the laces set.
And over that he had a gay surplice
As white as is the blossom upon the branch.
A merry lad he was, so save me God.
Well could he draw blood, and cut hair and shave,
And make a charter of land or a legal release. 
In twenty different ways could he trip and dance
After the school of Oxford as it was then,
And with his legs kick to and fro,
And play songs on a small fiddle,
To which he some times sang a loud high treble;
And he could play as well on a guitar.
In all the town there was no brew house nor tavern
That he did not visit with his entertainment,
Where any merry barmaid was.
But to say the truth, he was somewhat squeamish
About farting, and fastidious in his speech.
This Absolon, who was elegant and gay,
Goes with a censer on the holiday,
Censing the wives of the parish eagerly;
And many a lovely look he cast on them,
And especially on this carpenter's wife.
To look on her he thought a merry life,
She was so attractive and sweet and flirtatious.
I dare well say, if she had been a mouse,
And he a cat, he would have grabbed her at once.
This parish clerk, this elegant Absolon,
Has in his heart such a love-longing
That of no wife took he any offering;
For courtesy, he said, he would have none.
The moon, when it was night, very brightly shone,
And Absolon his guitar has taken;
For the sake of love he intended to stay awake.
And forth he goes, elegant and amorous,
Until he came to the carpenter's house
A little after cocks had crowed,
And took his place up by a casement window
That was upon the carpenter's wall.
He sings in his voice gentle and high,
"Now, dear lady, if it be thy will,
I pray yow that you will have pity on me,"
Very well in harmony with his guitar-playing.
This carpenter awoke, and heard him sing,
And spoke unto his wife, and said at once,
"What! Alison! Hearest thou not Absolon,
That chants thus next to our bedroom's wall?"
And she answered her husband immediately,
"Yes indeed, God knows, John, I hear it every bit."
This goes on; what more would you have?
From day to day this elegant Absolon
So woos her that he is in a sorry state.
He stays awake all the night and all the day;
He combs his flowing locks, and dressed himself elegantly;
He woos her by go-betweens and agents,
And swore he would be her own servant;
He sings, trilling like a nightingale;
He sent her sweetened wine, mead, and spiced ale,
And wafers, piping hot out of the fire;
And, because she was a townie, he offered money;
For some folk will be won for riches,
And some by force, and some for noble character.
Sometimes, to show his agility and skill,
He plays Herod upon a high stage.
But what good does it do him in this case?
She so loves this clever Nicholas
That Absolon may go whistle;
He had for his labor nothing but scorn.
And thus she makes Absolon her fool,
And turns all his earnestness into a joke.
Very true is this proverb, it is no lie,
Men say right thus: "Always the nearby sly one
Makes the distant loved one to be disliked."
For though Absolon be crazed or angry,
Because he was far from her sight,
This nearby Nicholas cast him in the shadow.
Now bear thyself well, thou clever Nicholas,
For Absolon may wail and sing "alas."
And so it happened on a Saturday,
This carpenter was gone to Osenay;
And clever Nicholas and Alisoun
Are agreed on this plan,
That Nicholas shall devise a trick
To beguile this hapless jealous husband;
And if it so be the game went right,
She should sleep in his arms all night,
For this was his desire and hers also.
And right away, without more words,
This Nicholas no longer would tarry,
But has carried very quietly unto his chamber
Both food and drink for a day or two,
And told her to say to her husband,
If he asked about Nicholas,
She should say she knew not where he was;
Of all that day she saw him not with eye;
She believed that he was ill,
Because, for no shout could her maid call him,
He would not answer for anything that might befall.
This goes on all that same Saturday,
That Nicholas still in his chamber lay,
And ate and slept, or did what he pleased,
Until Sunday, when the sun goes to rest.
This hapless carpenter has great marvel
About Nicholas, or what thing might ail him,
And said, "I am afraid, by Saint Thomas,
Things are not right with Nicholas.
God forbid that he should suddenly die!
This world is now very ticklish, surely.
I saw today a corpse carried to church
That just now, on last Monday, I saw him work.
"Go up," he said unto his servant at once,
"Call at his door, or knock with a stone.
Look how it is, and tell me quickly."
This servant goes up very resolutely,
And at the chamber door while he stood,
He cried and knocked as if he were crazy,
"What, hey! What do you, master Nicholay?
How can you sleep all the long day?"
But all for naught; he heard not a word.
He found a hole, very low upon a board,
Where the cat was accustomed to creep in,
And through that hole he looked in very carefully,
And at the last he had a sight of him.
This Nicholas sat ever gaping upward,
As if he were gazing on the new moon.
Down he goes, and told his master immediately
In what condition he saw this same man.
This carpenter began to bless himself,
And said, "Help us, Saint Frideswide!
A man knows little what shall happen to him.
This man is fallen, because of his astronomy,
In some madness or in some fit.
I always thought well how it should be!
Men should not know of God's secrets.
Yes, blessed be always an unlearned man
Who knows nothing but only his belief!
So fared another clerk with astronomy;
He walked in the fields to look 
Upon the stars, (to find) there what should happen,
Until he was fallen in a fertilizer pit;
He did not see that. But yet, by Saint Thomas,
I feel very sorry for clever Nicholas.
He shall be scolded for his studying,
If that I may, by Jesus, heaven's king!
Get me a staff, that I may pry up from below,   
While thou, Robyn, lift up the door.
He shall (come) out of his studying, as I guess."
And to the chamber door he turned his attention.
His servant was a strong fellow for this purpose,
And by the hasp he heaved it off at once;
Onto the floor the door fell straightway.
This Nicholas sat ever as still as stone,
And ever gaped upward into the air.
This carpenter supposed he was in despair,
And seized him by the shoulders vigorously,
And shook him hard, and cried loudly,
"What! Nicholay! What, how! What, look down!
Awake, and think on Christ's passion!
I bless thee from elves and from evil creatures."
Therewith the night-charm he said straightway
On four corners of the house about,
And on the threshold of the door outside:
"Jesus Christ and Saint Benedict,
Bless this house from every wicked creature,
For evil spirits of the nights, the white pater-noster!
Where went thou, Saint Peter's sister?"
And at the last this clever Nicholas
Began to sigh deeply, and said, "Alas!
Shall all the world be lost right now?"
This carpenter answered, "What sayest thou?
What! Think on God, as we do, men who work."
This Nicholas answered, "Fetch me drink,
And after will I speak in private
About a certain matter that concerns me and thee.
I will tell it to no other man, certainly."
This carpenter goes down, and comes again,
And brought of strong ale a large quart;
And when each of them had drunk his part,
This Nicholas shut fast his door,
And the carpenter sat down by him.
He said, "John, my host, beloved and dear,
Thou shalt upon thy pledged word swear to me here
That to no person thou shalt this counsel reveal,
For it is Christ's secrets that I say,
And if thou tell it to anyone, thou art completely lost;
For this vengeance thou shalt have therefore,
That if thou betray me, thou shalt go mad."
"Nay, Christ forbid it, for his holy blood!"
Said then this hapless man, "I am no blabbermouth,
And, though I say it, I do not like to gab.
Say what thou will, I shall never tell it 
To child nor wife, by Him that rescued souls from hell!"
"Now John," said Nicholas, "I will not lie;
I have found in my astrology,
As I have looked on the bright moon,
That now on Monday next, after midnight,
Shall fall a rain, and that so wild and raging
That Noah's flood was never half so large.
This world," he said, "in less than an hour
Shall all be drowned, so hideous is the shower.
Thus shall mankind drown, and lose their lives."
This carpenter answered, "Alas, my wife!
And shall she drown? Alas, my Alisoun!"
For sorrow of this he almost fell down,
And said, "Is there no remedy in this case?"
"Why, yes indeed, by God," said clever Nicholas,
"If thou will act in accordance with learning and (good) advice.
Thou mayst not act according to thine own ideas;
For thus says Salomon, which was very true:
`Do all in accordance with good advice, and thou shalt not rue (it).'
And if thou will act in accordance with good advice,
I guarantee, without mast and sail,
Yet shall I save her and thee and me.
Hast thou not heard how Noah was saved,
When our Lord had warned him before
That all the world should be destroyed by water?"
"Yes indeed," said this Carpenter, "very long ago."
"Hast thou not heard," said Nicholas, "also
The sorrow of Noah with his fellowship,
Before he could get his wife onto the ship?
He would rather, I dare well guarantee,
At that time, than have all his black sheep
That she had had a ship for herself alone.
And therefore, knowest thou what is best to do?
This needs haste, and of a hasty thing
Men may not preach nor make tarrying.
"Right now go bring us quickly into this dwelling
A kneading trough, or else a large vat,
For each of us, but see that they be large,
In which we may float as in a barge,
And have therein sufficient victuals
But for a day -- fie on the remnant!
The water shall recede and go away
About nine a.m. on the next day.
But Robin, thy knave, may not know of this, 
And also thy maid Gille I can not save;
Ask not why, for though thou ask me,
I will not tell God's secrets.
It suffices thee, unless thy wits go mad,
To have as great a grace as Noah had.
Thy wife shall I well save, beyond doubt.
Go now thy way, and speed thee on this business.
"But when thou hast, for her and thee and me,
Got us these three kneading tubs,
Then shalt thou hang them in the roof very high,
In a way that no man may espy our preparations.
And when thou thus hast done as I have said,
And hast laid our victuals carefully in them,
And also an axe to smite the cord in two,
When the water comes, so that we may go
And break a hole on high, upon the gable,
Toward the garden, over the stable,
That we may freely pass forth on our way,
When the great shower is gone away.
Then shalt thou float as merry, I guarantee,
As does the white duck after her drake.
Then will I call, `How, Alison! How, John!
Be merry, for the flood will soon pass.'
And thou will say, `Hail, master Nicholay!
Good morrow, I see thee well, for it is day.'
And then shall we be lords all our life
Of all the world, like Noah and his wife.
"But of one thing I warn thee very sternly:
Be well advised on that same night
On which we are entered onto shipboard,
That not one of us speak a word,
Nor call, nor cry, but be in his prayer;
For it is God's own dear command.
"Thy wife and thou must hang far apart,
So that between yow shall be no sin,
No more in looking than there shall be in deed.
This ordinance is said. Go, God give thee success!
Tomorrow at night, when people are all asleep,
Into our kneading-tubs will we creep,
And sit there, awaiting God's grace.
Go now thy way; I have no more time
To make of this any longer preaching.
Men say thus, `send the wise, and say nothing.'
Thou art so wise, one needs not teach thee.
Go, save our life, and that I beseech thee."
This hapless carpenter goes forth his way.
Very often he said "Alas and woe is me,"
And to his wife he told his secret,
And she was aware, and knew it better than he,
What all this ingenious scheme meant.
But nonetheless she acted as if she would die,
And said, "Alas! go forth thy way quickly,
Help us to escape, or we are dead each one of us!
I am thy faithful, truly wedded wife;
Go, dear spouse, and help to save our lives."
Lo, what a great thing is emotion!
One can die of imagination,
So deeply may a mental image be taken.
This hapless carpenter begins to tremble;
He thinks truly that he can see
Noah's flood come surging like the sea
To drown Alisoun, his honey dear.
He weeps, wails, looks wretched;
He sighs with very many a sorry groan;
He goes and gets him a kneading trough,
And after that a tub and a large vat,
And secretly he sent them to his dwelling,
And hanged them in the roof secretly.
With his own hand he made three ladders,
To climb by the rungs and the uprights
Unto the tubs hanging in the beams,
And provisioned them, both trough and tub,
With bread, and cheese, and good ale in a jug,
Sufficing just enough for a day.
But before he had made all this preparation,
He sent his servant, and also his servant girl,
Upon his business to go to London.
And on the Monday, when it drew toward night,
He shut his door without candlelight,
And prepared everything as it should be.
And shortly, up they climbed all three;
They sat still a good two and one-half minutes.
"Now, Pater-noster, quiet!" said Nicholay,
And "Quiet!" said John, and "Quiet!" said Alisoun.
This carpenter said his devotion,
And still he sits, and says his prayer,
Awaiting the rain, if he might hear it.
The dead sleep, for weary business,
Fell on this carpenter right, as I guess,
About curfew time, or a little more;
For suffering of his spirit he groans deeply,
And also he snores, for his head lay wrong.
Down on the ladder stalks Nicholay,
And Alisoun very quietly down she sped;
Without more words they go to bed,
Where the carpenter is accustomed to lie.
There was the revel and the sounds of festivity;
And thus lie Alison and Nicholas,
In business of mirth and of pleasure,
Until the bell of the early morning service began to ring,
And friars in the chapel began to sing.
This parish clerk, this amorous Absolon,
That is for love always so woebegone,
Upon the Monday was at Oseneye
With company, to be merry and amuse himself,
And by chance asked a cloistered monk
Very discreetly about John the carpenter;
And he drew him apart out of the church,
And said, "I know not; I have not seen him working here
Since Saturday; I suppose that he is gone
For timber, where our abbot has sent him;
For he is accustomed to go for timber 
And dwell at the granary a day or two;
Or else he is at his house, certainly.
Where he may be, I can not truly say."
This Absolon very was jolly and happy,
And thought, "Now is time to stay awake all night,
For surely I saw him not stirring
About his door, since day began to spring.
"As I may prosper, I shall, at cock's crow,
Very quietly knock at his window
That stands very low upon his bedroom's wall.
To Alison now I will tell all
My love-longing, for yet I shall not miss
That at the very least I shall her kiss.
Some sort of comfort shall I have, by my faith.
My mouth has itched all this long day;
That is a sign of kissing at the least.
All night I dreamed also I was at a feast.
Therefore I will go sleep an hour or two,
And all the night then will I stay awake and play."
When the first cock has crowed (about midnight), at once
Up rises this elegant lover Absolon,
And dresses himself handsomely, in every detail.
But first he chews cardamom and licorice,
To smell sweet, ere he had combed his hair.
Under his tongue he had a true-love herb,
For thus he thought he would be gracious.
He goes to the carpenter's house,
And he stands still under the casement window --
Unto his breast it reached, it was so low --
And softly he coughs with a gentle sound:
"What do you, honey-comb, sweet Alisoun,
My fair bird, my sweet cinnamon?
Awake, sweetheart mine, and speak to me!
Well little you think upon my woe,
That for your love I sweat wherever I go.
No wonder is though that I swelter and sweat;
I mourn as does a lamb after the tit.
Indeed, sweetheart, I have such love-longing
That like a true turtledove is my mourning.
I can eat no more than a maiden."
"Go from the window, you idiot," she said;
"So help me God, it will not be `come kiss me.'
I love another -- and else I were to blame --
Well better than thee, by Jesus, Absolon.
Go forth thy way, or I will cast a stone,
And let me sleep, in the name of twenty devils!"
"Alas," said Absolon, "and woe is me,
That true love was ever in such miserable circumstances!
Then kiss me, since it can be no better,
For Jesus' love, and for the love of me."
"Wilt thou then go thy way with that?" said she.
"Yes, certainly, sweetheart," said this Absolon.
"Then make thee ready," said she, "I come right now." 
And unto Nicholas she said quietly,
"Now hush, and thou shalt laugh all thy fill."
This Absolon set himself down on his knees
And said, "I am a lord in every way;
For after this I hope there comes more.
Sweetheart, thy grace, and sweet bird, thy mercy!"
The window she undoes, and that in haste.
"Get done with it," said she, "come on, and hurry up,
Lest our neighbors espy thee."
This Absolon wiped his mouth very dry.
Dark was the night as pitch, or as the coal,
And at the window out she put her hole,
And Absolon, to him it happened no better nor worse,
But with his mouth he kissed her naked ass
With great relish, before he was aware of this.
Back he jumped, and thought it was amiss,
For well he knew a woman has no beard.
He felt a thing all rough and long haired,
And said, "Fie! alas! what have I done?"
"Tehee!" said she, and clapped the window to,
And Absolon goes forth walking sadly.
"A beard! A beard!" said clever Nicholas,
"By God's body, this goes fair and well."
This hapless Absolon heard every bit,
And on his lip he began for anger to bite,
And to himself he said, "I shall pay thee back." 
Who rubs now, who now scrubs his lips
With dust, with sand, with straw, with cloth, with chips,
But Absolon, who says very often, "Alas!"
"My soul I entrust to Satan,
If I would not rather than (have) all this town," said he,
"Be avenged for this insult.
Alas," said he, "alas, I did not turn away!"
His hot love was cold and all extinguished;
For from that time that he had kissed her ass,
Love-making he thought not worth not a watercress,
For he was healed of his malady.
Very often he did renounce love-making,
And wept as does a child that is beaten.
At a slow pace he went down the street
To a smith men called dan Gerveys,
Who in his forge made plowing equipment; 
He sharpens ploughshares and plough blades busily.
This Absolon knocked all gently,
And said, "Open up, Gerveys, and that right now."
"What, who art thou?" "It am I, Absolon."
"What, Absolon! for Christ's sweet cross,
Why rise you so early? Ay, bless me!
What ails yow? Some pretty girl, God knows it,
Hath brought you to be running around  like this.
By Saint Note, you know well what I mean."
This Absolon cared not a bean
For all his joking; no word he gave in reply;
He had more business on hand 
Than Gerveys knew, and said, "Friend so dear,
That hot plough blade in the hearth here,
Lend it to me; I have something to do with it,
And I will bring it back to thee very soon."
Gerveys answered, "Certainly, were it gold,
Or in a sack countless silver coins,
Thou sholdest have it, as I am true smith.
Ay, Christ's foe! What will you do with it?"
"Concerning that," said Absolon, "be as be may.
I shall well tell it to thee to-morrow" --
And caught the plough blade by the cold handle.
Very softly out at the door he began to steal,
And went unto the carpenter's wall.   
He coughs first, and knocks then
Upon the window, just as he did before.
This Alison answered, "Who is there
That knocks so? I swear it is a thief."
"Why, nay," said he, "God knows, my sweet beloved,
I am thy Absolon, my darling.
Of gold," said he, "I have brought thee a ring.
My mother gave it to me, as God may save me;
Very fine it is, and also nicely engraved.
This will I give thee, if thou kiss me."
This Nicholas was risen to piss,
And thought he would make the joke even better;
He should kiss his ass before he escapes.
And he opened up the window hastily,
And he puts out his ass stealthily
Over the buttock, to the thigh;
And then spoke this clerk, this Absolon,
"Speak, sweet bird, I know not where thou art."
This Nicholas immediately let fly a fart
As great as if it had been a thunder-bolt,
So that with the stroke he was almost blinded;
And he was ready with his hot iron,
And he smote Nicholas in the middle of the ass.
Off goes the skin a hand's breadth about,
The hot plough blade so burned his rump
And for the pain he thought he would die.
As if he were crazy, for woe he began to cry,
"Help! Water! Water! Help, for God's heart!"
This carpenter woke suddenly out of his slumber,
And heard someone cry "water!" as if he were crazy,
And thought, "Alas, now comes Nowell's flood!"
He sits up without more words,
And with his ax he smote the cord in two,
And down goes all; he found nothing to sell (wasted no time),
Neither bread nor ale, until he came to the pavement
Upon the floor, and there he lay in a swoon.
Up started Alison and Nicholay,
And cried "Out" and "Help" in the street.
The neighbors, both low-ranking and high,
Run in to gawk at this man,
Who yet lay in a swoon, both pale and wan,
For with the fall he had broken his arm.
But he had to stand up for himself, though it went badly;
For when he spoke, he was immediately put down
By clever Nicholas and Alisoun.
They told every one that he was crazy;
He was so afraid of Nowell's flood
Because of his imagination that in his foolishness
He had bought himself three kneading tubs,
And had hanged them in the roof above;
And that he begged them, for God's love,
To sit in the roof, to keep him company.
The folk did laugh at his foolishness;
Into the roof they stare and they gape,
And turned all his harm into a joke.
For whatever this carpenter answered,
It was for naught; no one listened to his explanation,
With oaths great he was so sworn down
That he was considered crazy in all the town;
For every clerk immediately agreed with the other.
They said, "The man is crazy, my dear brother";
And every person did laugh at this strife.
Thus screwed was this carpenter's wife,
In spite of all his guarding and his jealousy,
And Absolon has kissed her lower eye,
And Nicholas is scalded in the rump.
This tale is done, and God save all this company!
A young man called Melibeus, mighty and rich, begot upon his wife, who was called Prudence,
a daughter who was called Sophie.
Upon one day it happened that he for his pleasure went into the fields to amuse himself.
His wife and also his daughter has he left within his house of which the doors were tightly shut.
Three of his old foes have seen this, and set ladders to the walls of his house,
and by windows have entered,
and beat his wife, and wounded his daughter with five mortal wounds in five different places --
this is to say, in her feet, in her hands, in her ears, in her nose,
and in her mouth -- and left her for dead, and went away.
When Melibeus had returned into his house, and saw all this mischief, he,
like a mad man tearing his clothes, began to weep and cry.
Prudence, his wife, insofar as she dared, besought him to stop his weeping. 
but nevertheless he began to cry and the longer he wept the more he wept.
This noble wife Prudence remembered the saying of Ovid, in his book
that is called the Remedy of Love, where he says
"He is a fool that stops the mother from weeping on the death of her child
until she has wept her fill as for a certain time,
and then shall one do his best efforts with amiable words to comfort her,
and pray her of her weeping to stint."
For which reason this noble wife Prudence allowed her husband
to weep and cry as for a certain amount of time,
and when she saw her opportunity, she said to him in this manner:
"Alas, my lord," said she, "why do you make yourself to be like a fool?
For truly it does not befit a wise man to make such a sorrow.
Your daughter, with the grace of God, shall recover and escape.
And, even if it were so that she right now were dead,
you ought not, for her death, to destroy yourself.
Seneca says: `The wise man shall not take too great discomfort for the death of his children,
but, certainly, he should suffer it in patience
as well as he abides the death of his own self.'"
This Melibeus answered immediately and said, "What man," said he, "should stint of his weeping 
who has such a good reason to weep?
Jesus Christ, our Lord, himself wept for the death of Lazarus his friend."
Prudence answered: "Certainly, I know well that moderate weeping is in no way forbidden to him who is sorrowful,
amongst folk in sorrow, but it is rather granted to him to weep.
The Apostle Paul unto the Romans writes, `One shall rejoice
with those who make joy and weep with such folk as weep.'
But though moderate weeping is granted, excessive weeping certainly is forbidden.
Moderation in weeping should be considered in the light of the lore that Seneca teaches us:
`When thy friend is dead,' said he, `let not thine eyes be too moist of tears,
nor too much dry; although the tears come to thine eyes, let them not fall;
and when thou hast lost thy friend, make an effort to get another friend; 
and this is more wisdom than to weep for thy friend
whom thou hast lost, for therein is no remedy.'
And therefore, if you govern yourself by wisdom, put away sorrow out of your heart.
Remember you that Jesus son of Sirach says, `A man that is joyous and glad in heart,
it conserves him flourishing in his age; but truly sorrowful heart makes his bones dry.'
He says also thus, that sorrow in heart slays very many a man.
Solomon says that just as moths in the sheep's fleece do harm to the clothes,
and the small worms to the tree, just so sorrow does harm to the heart.
Wherefore we should, as well in the death of our children
as in the loss of our other earthly goods, have patience.
Remember the patient Job. When he had lost his children and his earthly property,
and in his body endured and received very many a grievous tribulation, yet said he thus:
`Our Lord has given it to me; our Lord hath taken it from me; just as our Lord wished,
just so it is done; blessed be the name of our Lord!'"
To these foresaid things answered Melibeus unto his wife Prudence: "All thy words," said he, 
"are true and furthermore beneficial, but truly my heart is troubled with this sorrow
so grievously that I know not what to do."
"Have summoned," said Prudence, "all thy true friends and of thy family those that are wise. Tell your case,
and hearken what they say in advising, and govern yourself according to their advice." 
Solomon says, `Do all thy business by taking advice, and thou shalt never repent.'" 
Then, by the advice of his wife Prudence, this Melibeus had called up a great congregation of folk,
such as surgeons, physicians, old folk and young, and some of his old enemies reconciled
(as it seemed by their appearance) to his love and into his grace;
and therewithal there came some of his neighbors that did him reverence
more for dread than for love, as it often happens.
There came also very many subtle flatterers and wise advocates learned in the law.
And when this folk were assembled together, this Melibeus in sorrowful manner showed them his case.
And by the manner of his speech it seemed that in heart he bore a cruel anger,
ready to do vengeance upon his foes, and desired that the war should begin very soon;
but nevertheless, yet he asked their advice upon this matter.
A surgeon, by permission and assent of such as were wise, stood up
and to Melibeus said as you can hear:
"Sir," said he, "as to us surgeons it is our duty that we do to every person the best that we can,
where we are employed, and to our patients that we do no damage,
because of which it happens many times and often that when two men have each one wounded the other,
one same surgeon heals them both;
therefore unto our art it is not fitting to nourish war nor to support warring factions. 
But certainly, as to the curing of your daughter, although it be so that she is perilously wounded,
we shall do such diligent work from day to night that with the grace of God
she shall be whole and sound as soon as is possible."
Almost in just the same way the physicians answered, save that they said a few words more:
that just as maladies are cured by their contraries, just so shall men cure war by vengeance.
His neighbors full of envy, his feigned friends that seemed reconciled, and his flatterers
made an outward show of weeping, and worsened and much aggravated this matter in praising
greatly Melibee of might, of power, of riches, and of friends, despising the power of his adversaries,
and said flatly that he immediately should avenge himself on his foes and begin war.
Up rose then an advocate that was wise,
by leave and by advice of others that were wise, and said:
"Gentlemen, the urgent matter for which we are assembled in this place
is a very serious thing and an important matter,
because of the wrong and of the wickedness that has been done,
and also by reason of the great damages that in time coming
are possible to befall for this same cause,
and also because of the great riches and power of both the parties,
for the which reasons it would be a very great peril to err in this matter.
Wherefore, Melibeus, this is our opinion: we advise you above all things 
that right away thou do thy best efforts in keeping of thy own self in such a way
that thou not lack any spy nor guard in order to save thy person.
And after that, we advise that in thy house thou set sufficient garrison
so that they can defend as well thy body as thy house.
But certainly, to begin war, or suddenly to do vengeance, we can not decide
in so little time that it would be to our advantage.
Therefore we ask leisure and opportunity to have deliberation in this case to judge.
For the common proverb says thus: `He that soon judges, soon shall repent.'
And also men say that that judge is wise fhat soon understands a matter and judges at leisure; 
for although it be so that all tarrying is bothersome, 
it is not always to be reproved in giving of judgment nor in vengeance taking, 
when it is sufficient and reasonable.  
And that showed our Lord Jesus Christ by example, for when the woman that was taken in adultery
was brought in his presence to know what should be done with her person, although it be so that 
he knew well hmself what he would answer, yet he would not answer suddenly,
but he would have deliberation, and in the ground he wrote twice.
And by these causes we ask time for deliberation, and we shall then, by the grace of God, advise thee
something that shall be beneficial."
Up jumped then the young folk at once, and the most part of that company have scorned this old wise man
man, and began to make noise, and said that
just so as while that iron is hot men should smite,
just so men should avenge their wrongs while they are fresh and new;
and with loud voice they cried "War! War!"
Up rose then one of these old wise men, and with his hand made signal that
men should hold themselves still and give him audience.
"Gentlemen," said he, "there is very many a man that cries `War, war!'
who knows very little what war amounts to.
War at its beginning has so big an entryway and so large that every person may enter
when he pleases and easily find war;
but certainly what end that shall consequently befall, it is not easy to know.
For truly, when war is once begun, there is very many a child unborn of his mother
that shall die young because of that same war, or else live in sorrow and die in wretchedness.
And therefore, ere any war begin, men must have much advice and much deliberation."
And when this old man intended to reinforce his argument by reasons, well nigh all at once they began 
to rise to interrupt his speech, and very often prayed him to abridge his argument.
For truly, he who preaches to those who do not want to hear his words, his sermon annoys them.
For Jesus son of Sirach says that "music in weeping is an annoying thing"; this is to say:
it as much avails to speak before folk whom his speech annoys
as it is to sing before him who weeps.
And when this wise man saw that he lacked an audience, all shame-fast he set himself down again.
For Solomon says: "Where thou can not have any audience, force thyself not to speak."
"I see well," said this wise man, "that the common proverb is true, that
`good advice is lacking when it is most needed.'"
Yet had this Melibeus among his advisors many folk that secretly in his ear advised him on certain matters,
and advised him the contrary in the hearing of all.
When Melibeus had heard that the greatest part of his advisors were agreed that he should make war,
immediately he consented to their advice and fully affirmed their opinion.
Then dame Prudence, when she saw how her husband prepared himself to avenge himself on his
foes and to begin war, she in very humble manner, when she saw her time, said to him these words:
"My lord," said she, "I beseech you, as heartily as I dare and can,
do not hasten yourself too fast and, as you hope to prosper, give me a hearing.
For Petrus Alphonsus says, `Whoever does to thee either good or harm, hasten thee not to requite it,
for in this manner thy friend will abide and thine enemy shall the longer live in dread.'
The proverb says, `He hastens well that wisely can abide,' and `in wicked haste is no benefit.'"
This Melibee answered unto his wife Prudence: "I do not intend," said he, "to work according to thy advice,
for many causes and reasons. For certainly, every person would hold me then a fool;
this is to say, if I, for thy advice, would change
things that are ordained and affirmed by so many wise men.
Secondly, I say that all women are wicked, and not one good of them all.
For `of a thousand men,' says Solomon, `I found one good man, but certainly,
of all women, a good woman found I never.'
And also, certainly, if I governed myself according to thy advice,
it should seem that I had given to thee the mastery over me,
and God forbid that it were so!
For Jesus son of Sirach says that `if the wife have mastery, she is contrary to her husband.'
And Solomon says: `Never in thy life to thy wife, nor to thy child, nor to thy friend
give any power over thyself, for it would be better that thy children
ask of thy person things that they need than that thou see thyself
in the hands of thy children.'
And also if I would work according to thy advice, certainly, my counsel must some times be secret,
until it were time that it must be known, and this may not be.
When dame Prudence, very debonairly and with great patience, had heard all that her husband 
was pleased to say, then she asked of him permission to speak, and said in this manner:
"My lord," said she, "as to your first reason, certainly it may easily be answered. For I say that
it is no folly to change one's plans when the situation is changed,
or else when the matter seems other than it was before.
And moreover, I say that though you have sworn and promised to accomplish 
your undertaking, and nevertheless you abandon
performing that same undertaking for a good reason, men should not say therefore that you are a liar nor forsworn.
For the book says that `the wise man tells no lie when he turns his inclination to the better.'
And although it be so that your undertaking is established and decided upon by a great multitude of folk,
yet you need not carry out that plan unless you want to.
For the truth of things and the benefit are rather found in few folk that are wise and
full of reason than by a great multitude of folk where every man cries and babbles what he pleases.
Truly such a multitude is not honorable.
And as to the second reason, where you say that all women are wicked;
with all due respect to you, certainly you despise all women in this manner, and
`he who despises all, displeases all,' as says the book.
And Seneca says that `whosoever will have wisdom shall no man disparage,
but he shall gladly teach the knowledge that he knows without presumption or pride;
and such things of which he knows nothing, he should not be ashamed to learn them,
and ask for advice from lesser folk than himself.'
And, sir, that there has been many a good woman may easily be proven.
For certainly, sir, our Lord Jesus Christ would never have condescended to be born of a woman,
if all women had been wicked.
And after that, for the great goodness that is in women,
our Lord Jesus Christ, when he was risen from death to life,
appeared to a woman rather than to his Apostles.
And though Solomon says that he never found a good woman,
it follows not therefore that all women are wicked.
For though he found no good woman, certainly,
many another man has found many a woman very good and true.
Or else, possibly, the intent of Solomon was this:
that, in supreme goodness, he found no woman --
this is to say, that there is no creature who has supreme goodness save God alone,
as he himself records in his Gospels.
For there is no creature so good that he does not lack
something of the perfection of God, who is his maker.
Your third reason is this: you say that if you govern yourself by my advice,
it should seem that you had given me the mastery and the lordship over your person.
Sir, with all due respect to you, it is not so. For if it were true that no man should be advised
but only of them that had lordship and mastery of his person, men would not be advised so often.
For truly that man who asks advice about a plan, yet has free choice
whether he will follow by that advice or non.
And as to your fourth reason, where you say that the gossip of women can hide things that they
know not, as who says that a woman can not hide what she knows;
sir, these words are understood of women that are gossips and wicked;
of which women men say that three things drive a man out of his house --
that is to say, smoke, dropping of rain, and wicked wives;
and of such women says Solomon that
`it were better dwell in desert than with a woman that is dissolute.'
And sir, by your leave, that am not I,
for you have very often tested my great silence and my great patience, and also how well that
I can hide and conceal things that men ought secretly to hide.
And truly, as to your fifth reason, where you say that in wicked advice women vanquish men,
God knows, that reason has no value here.
For understand now, you ask advice to do wickedness;
and if you will do wickedness, and your wife restrains that wicked purpose,
and overcomes you by reason and by good advice,
certainly your wife ought rather to be praised than blamed.
Thus should you understand the philosopher that says, `In wicked advice women vanquish their husbands.'
And whereas you blame all women and their reasons, I shall show you by many examples that
many a woman has been very good, and yet are, and their advices very wholesome and beneficial.
Also some men have said that the counsel of women
is either too expensive or else too little of price.
But although it be so that very many a woman is bad and her advice vile and not worthy,
yet have men found very many a good woman, and very discrete and wise in giving counsel.
Lo, Jacob by the good advice of his mother Rebecca won the blessing of Isaac his fader
and the lordship over all his brethren.
Judith by her good advice delivered the city of Bethulia, in which she dwelled,
out of the hands of Holofernus, who had besieged it and would have entirely destroyed it.
Abigail delivered Nabal her husband from David the king, who would have slain him,
and appeased the anger of the king by her wit and by her good advice.
Hester by her good counsel advanced greatly the people of God in the reign of Assuerus the king.
And the same goodness in good advising of many a good woman may men tell.
And moreover, when our Lord had created Adam, our forefather, he said in this manner:
`It is not good to be a man alone; let us make for him a helpmate similar to himself.'
Here may you see that if women were not good, and their advice good and beneficial,
our Lord God of heaven would never have made them,
nor called them help of man, but rather confusion of man.
And there said once a clerk in two verses, `What is better than gold? Jasper.
What is better than jasper? Wisdom.
And what is better than wisdom? Woman. And what is better than a good woman? Nothing.'
And, sir, by many other reasons may you see that
many women are good, and their advice good and beneficial.
And therefore, sir, if you will trust to my advice, I shall restore you your daughter whole and sound.
And also I will do for you so much that you shall have honor in this undertaking."
When Melibee had heard the words of his wife Prudence, he said thus:
"I see well that the word of Solomon is sooth.
He says that `words that are spoken discretely and properly are honeycombs,
for they give sweetness to the soul and healthfulness to the body.'
And, wife, because of thy sweet words, and also because I have tested and proven thy great wisdom 
and thy great truth, I will govern myself by thy advice in all things."
"Now, sir," said dame Prudence, "and since you consent to be governed by my advice,
I will inform you how you shall govern yourself in the choice of your advisors.
You shall first in all your works meekly beseech the high God that he will be your advisor;
and prepare yourself with the aim that he give you advice and comfort, as Tobias taught his son:
`At all times thou shalt bless God, and pray him to prepare thy ways,
and look that all thy counsels are in him for evermore.'
Saint James also says: `If any of you have need of wisdom, ask it of God.'
And afterward then shall you take advice in yourself,
and examine well your thoughts of such thing as it seems to you best for your advantage. 
And then shall you drive from your heart three things that are contrary to good advice;
that is to say, anger, greed, and haste.
"First, he who asks advice of himself, certainly he must be without anger, for many reasons.
The first is this: he who has great anger and wrath in himself, he supposes always that
he can do a thing that he can not do.
And secondly, he who is angry and wrathful, he can not well judge;
and he who can not well judge, can not well advise.
The third is this, that he that is angry and wrathful, as says Seneca,
can not speak anything but blameworthy things,
and with his vicious words he stirs other folk to anger and to ire.
And also, sir, you must drive greed out of your heart.
For the Apostle says that greed is root of all harms.
And trust well that a greedy man can neither judge nor think anything,
except only to fulfill the object of his greed;
and certainly, that can never be accomplished,
for always the more abundance that he has of riches, the more he desires.
And, sir, you must also drive out of your heart haste; for certainly,
you can not judge for the best by a sudden thought that falls in your heart,
but you must reflect upon it very often.
For, as you heard before this, the common proverb is this, that `he who soon judges, soon repents.'
Sir, you are not always in the same frame of mind;
for certainly, something that sometimes seems to you that it is good to do,
another time it seems to you the contrary.
"When you have pondered the matter and have judged by good deliberation such thing as seems best to you,
then I advise you that you keep it secret.
Reveal your plans to no person, but if it so be that you believe truly 
through your revealing your condition shall be to you the more advantageous.
For Jesus son of Sirach says, `Neither to thy foe nor to thy friend discover not thy secret nor thy folly,
for they will give you audience and attention and support in thy presence and scorn thee in thine absence.'
Another clerk says that `scarcely shalt thou find any person that can keep plans secretly.'
The book says, `While thou keepest thy plan in thine heart, thou keepest it in thy prison,
and when thou reveal thy plans to any person, he holds thee in his snare.'
And therefore for you it is better to hide your plans in your heart than pray him
to whom you have revealed your plans that he will keep it close and still.
For Seneca says: `If it so be that thou can not hide thine own plans,
how dare thou pray any other person to keep thy advice secretly?'
But nevertheless, if thou believe truly that the revealing of thy plans to a person will make
thy condition stand in the better condition, then shalt thou tell him thy plans in this manner.
First thou shalt make no outward sign whether thou would prefer peace or war, or this or that,
nor show him not thy will and thine intent.
For trust well that commonly these advisors are flatterers,
namely the advisors of great lords,
for they force themselves always rather to speak pleasant words, inclining to the lord's desire,
than words that are true or beneficial.
And therefore men say that the rich man has seldom good advice, unless he have it of himself.
And after that thou shalt consider thy friends and thine enemies.
And as concerning thy friends, thou shalt consider which of them are
most faithful and most wise and eldest and most proven in giving advice;
and of them shalt thou ask thy advice, as the case requires.
I say that first you shall call to your council your friends that are true.
For Solomon says that `just as the heart of a man delights in taste that is sweet,
just so the advice of true friends gives sweetness to the soul.'
He says also, `Nothing can be compared to a true friend,
for certainly gold nor silver are not worth so much as the good will of a true friend.'
And also he says that `a true friend is a strong defense; whoever finds it,
certainly he finds a great treasure.'
Then shall you also consider whether your true friends are discrete and wise.
For the book says, `Ask always thy advice of those who are wise.'
And by this same reason shall you call to your council some of your friends that are of suitably advanced age,
such as have seen and are expert in many things and are proven in giving advice.
For the book says that `in old men is the wisdom, and in long time the prudence. 
And Cicero says that `great things are not always accomplished by strength, nor by agility of body, but
by good advice, by a person's power to persuade, and by knowledge; the which three things are not enfeebled by age,
but certainly they gain strength and increase day by day.'
And then shall you keep this for a general rule: First you shall call to your council
a few of your friends who are particularly esteemed;
for Solomon says, `Many friends have thou, but among a thousand chose thyself one to be thy advisor.'
For although it be so that thou first tell thy advice only to a few,
thou mayst afterward tell it to more folk if it be needed.
But look always that thy advisors have those three conditions that I have said before --
that is to say, that they are true, wise, and of old experience.
And work not always in every need by one advisor alone;
for sometimes it is necessary to be advised by many.
For Solomon says, `Salvation of things is where there are many advisors.'
"Now, since I have told you of which folk you should be advised, now
I will teach you which advice you ought to shun.
First, you shall shun the advice of fools; for Solomon says, `Take no counsel of a fool,
for he can not advise except in accordance with his own desire and his inclination.'
The book says that `the characteristic of a fool is this: he easily believes harm of every person,
and easily believes all goodness in himself.'
Thou shalt also shun the advice of all flatterers, such as exert themselves rather to praise your person  
by flattery than to tell you the truth of things.
Wherefore Cicero says, `Amongst all the pestilences that are in friendship the greatest is flattery.'
And therefore is it more needful that thou shun and dread flatterers than any other people.
The book says, `Thou shalt rather dread and flee from the sweet words of flattering praisers
than from the sharp words of thy friend who tells thee thy truths.'
Solomon says that `the words of a flatterer is a snare with which to catch innocents.'
He says also that `he who speaks to his friend words of sweetness and of pleasance
sets a net before his feet to catch him.'
And therefore says Cicero, `Incline not thine ears to flatterers, and take no advice of the words of flattery.'
And Cato says, `Ponder thee well, and shun the words of sweetness and of pleasance.'
And also thou shalt shun the advice of thine old enemies that are reconciled.
The book says that `no person returns safely into the good will of his old enemy.'
And Aesop says, `Trust not to those with whom thou hast had at some time war or enmity, 
nor tell them not thy plans.'
And Seneca tells the reason why: `It may not be,' says he, `that where great
fire has long time endured, but that there dwells some vapor of warmness.'
And therefore says Solomon, `In thine old foe trust never.'
For surely, though thine enemy be reconciled, and makes thee the appearance of humility,
and bows to thee with his head, trust him never.
For certainly he makes that feigned humility more for his advantage than for any love of thy person,
because he supposes to have victory over thy person by such feigned behavior,
the which victory he might not have by strife or war.
And Petrus Alphnsus says, `Make no fellowship with thine old enemies, for if thou do them goodness,
they will pervert it into wickedness.'
And also thou most shun the advice of those who are thy servants and bear thee great reverence,
for perhaps they say it more for dread than for love.
And therefore says a philosopher in this manner:
`There is no person perfectly true to him whom he too sorely dreads.'
And Cicero says, `There is no might so great of any emperor that long may endure,
unless he has more love of the people than dread.'
Thou shalt also shun the advice of folk that are drunkards, for they nor can hide no plans.
For Solomon says, `There is no secrecy where drunkenness reigns.'
You shall also be suspicious of the advice of such folk as
advise you one thing privately and counsel you the contrary openly.
For Cassiodorus says that `it is a difficult task to hinder a scheme,  
when a person appears to do one thing openly and secretly works the contrary.'
Thou shalt also be suspicious of the advice of wicked folk. For the book says,
`The advice of wicked folk is always full of fraud.'
And David says, `Blissful is that man who has not followed the advice of scoundrels.' 
Thou shalt also shun the advice of young folk, for their counsel is not ripe.
"Now, sir, since I have showed you of which folk you shall take your advice
and of which folk you shall follow the advice,
now will I teach you how you shall examine your advice, according to the doctrine of Cicero.
In the examining then of your advisor you shall consider many things .
First of all thou shalt consider that in that thing that thou intendest, and upon which thing thou will have advice,
that real truth be said and preserved; this is to say, tell truly thy tale.
For he that speaks falsely may not well be advised in that case of which he lies.
And after this thou shalt consider the things that agree with that thou intendest
for to act as thy advisors advise, if reason accord thereto,
and also if thy might can attain thereto, and if the larger part
and the better part of thy advisors accord thereto, or not.
Then shalt thou consider what thing shall follow from that advice,
as hate, peace, war, grace, profit, or damage, and many other things.
And in all these things thou shalt chose the best and abandon all other things .
Then shalt thou consider of what root is engendered the matter of thy advice
and what fruit it may conceive and engender.
Thou shalt also consider all these causes, from whence they are sprung.
And when you have examined your advice, as I have said, and (decided) which part is the better
and more beneficial, and have tested it by many wise and old folk,
then shalt thou consider if thou can perform it and make of it a good end.
For certainly reason will not desire that any man should begin a thing
unless he might perform it as he ought to;
nor no person should take upon him so heavy a charge that he might not bear it.
For the proverb says, `He who too much embraces, keeps little.'
And Cato says, `Try to do such thing as thou hast power to do,
lest that the charge oppress thee so sorely that
thou art compelled to abandon an undertaking that thou hast begun.'
And if it so be that thou art in doubt about whether thou can perform a thing or not,
choose rather to suffer than begin.
And Petrus Alphonsus says, `If thou hast might to do a thing of which thou must repent,
it is better "nay" than "yea."'
This is to say, that for thee it is better hold thy tongue still than to speak.
Then may you understand by stronger reasons that if thou hast power to perform a work
of which thou shalt repent, then is it better that thou suffer than begin.
Well say they who forbid every person to attempt a thing of which he is in doubt
whether he can perform it or not.
And after, when you have examined your advice, as I have said before, and know well that
you can perform your enterprise, prosecute it then diligently until it be at an end.
"Now is it reasonable and time that I show you when and wherefore that
you may change your plans without earning dishonor.
Truly, a man may change his purpose and his plans if the cause ceases,
or when a new case befalls.
For the law says that `things that newly befall require new plans.' 
And Seneca says, `If thy plan is come to the ears of thine enemy, change thy plan.'
Thou mayst also change thy plan if it so be that thou find that by error,
or by other cause, harm or damage may befall.
Also if thy plan be unjust, or else comes of dishonest cause, change thy plan.
For the laws say that `all promises that are dishonest are of no value';
and also if it so be that it is impossible, or can not goodly be performed or kept.
"And take this for a general rule, that every plan that is affirmed so strongly that it may not
be changed for any condition that may befall, I say that that plan is wicked."
This Melibeus, when he had heard the doctrine of his wife dame Prudence, answered in this wise:
"Dame," said he, "as yet until this time you have well and fittingly taught me as in general how
I should govern myself in the choice and in the retention of my advisors.
But now would I eagerly desire that you would get down to particulars 
and tell me how you like it, or what it seems to you, concerning our advisors
that we have chosen in our present need."
"My lord," said she, "I beseech you in all humility that you will not willfully reply against my arguments,
nor upset your heart, though I speak something that may displease you.
For God knows that, in my intent, I speak it for your best,
for your honor, and for your benefit also.
And truly, I hope that your benignity will take it in patience.
Trust me well," said she, "that your advice in this case should not, to speak properly,
be called an advising, but a motion or a moving of folly,
in which advice you have erred in many a different way.
"First of all, you have erred in the assembling of your advisors.
For you should first have called a few folk to your council, and after you might have showed it
to more folk, if it had been necessary.
But certainly, you have suddenly called to your council a great multitude of people,
very burdensome and very annoying to hear.
Also you have erred, for whereas you should only have called to your council 
your true friends old and wise,
you have called foreign folk, young folk, false flatterers, and enemies reconciled,
and folk who do you reverence without love.
And also you have erred, for you have brought with you to your council anger, greed, and haste,
the which three things are contrary to every council honorable and beneficial;
the which three things you have not annihilated or destroyed them,
neither in yourself, nor in your advisors, as you ought.
You have erred also, for you have shown to your advisors
your desire and your inclination to make war immediately and to do vengeance.
They have espied by your words to what thing you are inclined;
and therefore have they advised you rather to your inclination than to your advantage.
You have erred also, for it seems that to you it suffices
to have been advised by these counselors only, and with little consultation,
whereas in so great and so urgent a situation it had been necessary to have more advisors
and more deliberation to perform your undertaking.
You have erred also, for you have not examined your advice in the foresaid manner,
nor in suitable manner, as the case requires.
You have erred also, for you have made no division between your advisors -- this is to say,
between your true friends and your feigned advisors --
and you have not known the will of your true friends old and wise,
but you have cast all their words in an hodgepodge, and inclined your heart to the larger part
and to the greater number, and to that you are yielded.
And since you know well that men shall always find a greater number of fools than of wise men,
and therefore the counsels that are at gatherings and multitudes of folk, where men pay more attention
to the number than to the wisdom of persons,
you see well that in such councils fools have the mastery."
Melibeus answered again, and said, "I grant well that I have erred;
but whereas thou hast told me before now
that he is not to blame who changes his advisors in certain cases and for certain just causes,
I am all ready to change my advisors just as thou will devise.
The proverb says that `to do sin is human,
but certainly to persevere long in sin is work of the devil.'"
To this sentence answered immediately dame Prudence, and said,
"Examine," said she, "your counsel, and let us see
the which of them have spoken most reasonably and taught you best advice.
And forasmuch as the examination is necessary, let us begin at the surgeons
and at the physicians, who first spoke in this matter.
I tell you that the surgeons and physicians have spoken to you in counselling you discretely, as they ought,
and in their speech said very wisely that to their office it pertains to do to every person
honor and profit, and no person to harm,
and in accordance with their craft to do great diligence
unto the care of those that they have in their governance.
And, sir, just as they have answered wisely and discretely,
just so I deduce that they are highly and chiefly rewarded for their noble speech,
and also for they should do the more diligent effort in the care of your dear daughter.
For although it be so that they are your friends, therefore shall you not allow 
that they serve you for naught,
but you ought the rather to reward them and show them your generosity.
And as touching the theory that the physicians developed in this case -- this is to say,
that in maladies that one contrary is cured by another contrary --
I would be eager to know how you understand that text, and what is your interpretation."
"Certainly," said Melibeus, "I understand it in this way:
that just as they have done me a contrary, right so should I do them another.
For just as they have avenged themselves on me and done me wrong,
just so shall I avenge myself upon them and do them wrong;
and then have I cured one contrary by another."
"Lo, lo," said dame Prudence, "how easily is every man inclined to his own desire
and to his own pleasure!
Certainly," said she, "the words of the physicians should not have been understood in this way.
For certainly, wickedness is not contrary to wickedness, nor vengeance to vengeance,
nor wrong to wrong, but they are similar.
And therefore one vengeance is not cured by another vengeance, nor one wrong by another wrong,
but each of them increases and aggravates the other.
But certainly, the words of the physicians should be understood in this way:
for good and wickedness are two contraries, and peace and war, vengeance
and forbearance, discord and accord, and many other things ;
but certainly, wickedness must be cured by goodness, discord by accord, war by peace,
and so forth of other things .
And to this Saint Paul the Apostle agrees in many places.
He says, `Yield not harm for harm, nor wicked speech for wicked speech,
but do well to him that does thee harm and bless him that says to thee harm.'
And in many other places he recommends peace and accord.
But now will I speak to you of the advice which was given to you
by the men of law and the wise folk,
who said all by unanimous agreement, as you have heard before,
that over all things you shall do your best effort to guard your person and to garrison your house;
and said also that in this case you ought to work very advisedly and with great deliberation.
And, sir, as to the first point, that touches on the keeping of your person,
you shall understand that he who has war shall evermore meekly and devoutly pray, before all things,
that Jesus Christ of his mercy will have him in his protection
and be his best help at his need.
For certainly, in this world there is no person that can be advised nor guarded sufficiently
without the protection of our Lord Jesus Christ.
To this opinion agrees the prophet David, who says,
`If God does not guard the city, in vain watches he who guards it.'
Now, sir, then shall you commit the guarding of your person
to your true friends that are proven and known,
and of them shall you ask help to guard your person. For Cato says,
`If thou hast need of help, ask it of thy friends,
for there is no physician so good as thy true friend.'
And after this then shall you keep yourself from all unfamiliar folk, and from liars,
and be always suspicious of their company.
For Petrus Alphonsus says, `take no company by the way of a strange man,
but if it so be that thou have known him of a longer time.
And if it so be that he fall into thy company by chance, without thine assent,
inquire then as subtly as thou can of his way of life, and of his life before, and feign thy way;
say that [thou] wolt thither as thou will not go;
and if he bears a spear, hold thyself on the right side,
and if he bear a sword, hold thyself on the left side.'
And after this then shall you keep yourself wisely from all such manner people as I have said before,
and them and their advice shun.
And after this then shall you keep yourself in such manner
that, for any confidence in your strength, that you nor despise not, nor account not the might
of your adversary so little that you neglect the protection of your person because of your over-confidence,
for every wise man dreads his enemy.
And Solomon says, `Happy is he who of all has dread,
for certainly, he who through the hardiness of his heart and through the hardiness of himself has
too great self-confidence, to him shall evil befall.'
Then shall you evermore watch out for ambushes and all espionage,
For Seneca says that `the wise man who dreads harms, shuns harms,
nor does he who shuns perils fall into perils.'
And although it be so that it seems that thou art in a safe place,
yet shalt thou always do thy best efforts in guarding of thy person;
this is to say, be not negligent to guard thy person
not only from thy greatest enemies but from thy least enemy.
Seneca says, `A man that is well advised, he dreads his least enemy.'
Ovid says that `the little weasel will slay the great bull and the wild hart.'
And the book says, `A little thorn may prick a king very sorely,
and a hound will bring to bay the wild boar.'
But nevertheless, I say not thou should be so cowardly that thou fear where there is no reason for dread.
The book says that `some folk have great desire to deceive, but yet they dread themselves to be deceived.'
Yet thou should dread to be poisoned and keep thyself from the company of scoffers.
For the book says, `With scorners make no company, but flee their words as venom.'
"Now, as to the second point,
whereas your wise advisors counseled you to fortify your house with great diligence,
I would be eager to know how you understand those words and what is your decision."
Melibeus answered and said, "Certainly, I understand it in this way: That I should fortify my house with towers,
such as have castles and other sorts of edifices, and armor, and artillery,
by which things I can my person and my house so guard and defend
that my enemies shall be in dread to approach my house."
To this sentence answered immediately Prudence: "Fortifying," said she,
"of high towers and of great edifices pertains sometimes to pride.
And also men make high towers, [and great edifices] with great expenditures and with great travail,
and when that they are accomplished, yet are they not worth a straw,
unless they are defended by true friends that are old and wise.
And understand well that the greatest and strongest garrison that a rich man may have,
as well to keep his person as his goods, is
that he is beloved by his subjects and by his neighbors.
For thus says Cicero, that `there is a sort of garrison 
that no man can vanquish nor discomfit, and that is
for a lord to be beloved by his citizens and by his people.'
Now, sir, as to the third point, whereas your old
and wise advisors said that you ought not suddenly nor hastily proceed in this urgent matter,
but that you ought to prepare yourself and get ready in this case with great diligence and great deliberation;
truly, I believe that they spoke very wisely and real truth.
For Cicero says, `In every urgent matter, ere thou begin it, prepare thyself with great diligence.'
Then say I that in vengeance-taking, in war, in battle, and in fortification,
ere thou begin, I advise that thou prepare thyself for that, and do it with great deliberation.
For Cicero says that `long preparation before the battle makes short victory.'
And Cassiodorus says, `The protection is stronger when it is long time considered.'
But now let us speak of the advice that was agreed upon by your neighbors,
such as do you reverence without love,
your old enemies reconciled, your flatterers,
that advised you certain things secretly, and openly counseled you the contrary;
the young folk also, who advised you to avenge yourself and make war immediately.
And certainly, sir, as I have said before, you have greatly erred
to have called such sort of folk to your council,
which advisors are enough reproved by the reasons spoken earlier.
But nevertheless, let us now descend to the particular details. You should first proceed according to the doctrine of Cicero.
Certainly, the truth of this matter, or of this advice, we need not diligently inquire,
for it is well known who they are that have done to you this trespass and villainy,
and how many trespassers, and in what manner
they have done to you all this wrong and all this villainy.
And after this, then you should examine the second condition which the same Cicero adds in this matter.
For Cicero hypothesized a thing which he calls `consenting'; this is to say,
who are they, and which are they and how many that consent to thy advice
in thy willfulness to do hasty vengeance.
And let us consider also who are they, and how many are they,   
and which are they that consented to your adversaries.
And certainly, as to the first point, it is well known which folk are
they that consented to your hasty willfulness,
for truly, all those who advised you to make sudden war are not your friends.
Let us now consider which are they that you consider so greatly your friends as to your person.
For although it be so that you are mighty and rich, certainly you are but alone,
for certainly you have no child but a daughter,
nor do you have neither brethren, nor first cousins, nor any other close relatives,
for which your enemies for dread should stop pleading with you or destroying your person.
You know also that your riches must be dispended in several parts,
and when each person has his part, they will take but little regard to avenging thy death.
But thine enemies are three, and they have many children, brethren, cousins, and other close kin.
And though it so were that thou haddest slain of them two or three, yet dwell there enough
to avenge their death and to slay thy person.
And though it so be that your kin are more sure and steadfast than the kin of your adversary,
yet nevertheless your kinship is but a far kinship; they are but little related to you,
and the kin of your enemies are close relatives to them.
And certainly, in that respect, their condition is better than yours.
Then let us consider also the advice of those who advised you to take sudden vengeance,
whether it accord to reason.
And certainly, you know well `nay.'
For, by justice and reason, there may no man take vengeance on no person
but the judge that has the jurisdiction of it,
when it is granted to him to take that vengeance hastily or temperately, as the law requires.
And yet moreover of that word that Cicero calls `consenting,'
thou should consider if thy might and thy power can consent
and suffice to thy willfulness and to thy advisors.
And certainly thou can well say that `nay.'
For truly, strictly speaking, we can do no thing
but only such thing as we can do justly.
And certainly in justice must you take no vengeance, as of your own authority.
Then must you see that your power is not consistent, nor accords not, with your willfulness.
"Let us now examine the third point, that Cicero calls `consequent.'
Thou shalt understand that the vengeance that thou intendest to take is the consequent;
and thereof follows another vengeance, peril, and war, and other damages without number,
of which we are not aware, at this time.
And as touching the fourth point, what Cicero calls `engendering,'
thou shalt consider that this wrong which that is done to thee
is engendered by the hate of thine enemies,
and by the vengeance-taking thereupon that would engender another vengeance,
and much sorrow and wasting of riches, as I said.
"Now, sir, as to the point that Cicero calls `causes,' which is the last point,
thou shalt understand that the wrong that thou hast received has certain causes,
which clerks call Oriens and Efficiens, and Causa longinqua and Causa propinqua;
this is to say, the far cause and the near cause.
The far cause is almighty God, that is cause of all things .
The near cause is thy three enemies.
The cause accidental was hate.
The cause material are the five wounds of thy daughter.
The cause formal is the manner of their working who brought ladders and climbed in at thy windows.
The cause final was to slay thy daughter. It did not delay insofar as was in their power.
But to speak of the far cause, as to what end they shall come, or what shall finally
happen to them in this case, nor can I judge except by conjecture and by supposing.
For we should suppose that they shall come to a wicked end,
because the Book of Decrees says, `Seldom, or with great effort, are causes brought to a good end
when they are badly begun.'
"Now, sir, if men would ask me why God allowed men to do you this villainy,
certainly, I can not well answer, with any certainty.
For the apostle says that `the sciences and the judgments of our Lord God almighty are very deep;
there can no man comprehend nor study them sufficiently.'
Nonetheless, by certain assumptions and conjectures, I hold and believe
that God, who is full of justice and of righteousness, has allowed this to happen by just reasonable cause.
"Thy name is Melibee; this is to say, `a man that drinks honey.'
Thou hast drunk so much honey of sweet temporal riches, and pleasures and honors of this world
that thou art drunk and hast forgotten Jesus Christ thy creator.
Thou hast not done to him such honor and reverence as thee ought,
nor thou hast not well paid attention to the words of Ovid, who says,
`Under the honey of the goods of the body is hid the venom that slays the soul.'
And Solomon says, `If thou hast found honey, eat of it what suffices,
for if thou eat of it to excess, thou shalt vomit' and be needy and poor.
And perhaps Christ has thee in disdain, and
has turned away from thee his face and his ears of mercy,
and also he has allowed that thou hast been punished in the manner that thou hast trespassed.
Thou hast done sin again our Lord Christ,
for certainly, the three enemies of mankind
-- that is to say, the flesh, the fiend, and the world --
thou hast allowed them enter into thine heart willfully by the windows of thy body,
and hast not defended thyself sufficiently against their assaults and their temptations,
so that they have wounded thy soul in five places;
this is to say, the deadly sins that are entered into thine heart by thy five senses.
And in the same manner our Lord Christ has willed and allowed 
that thy three enemies are entered into thine house by the windows
and have wounded thy daughter in the aforesaid manner."
"Certainly," said Melibee, "I see well that you strengthen yourself much by words to overcome me in such a manner
that I shall not avenge me on my enemies,
showing me the perils and the evils that might fall because of this vengeance.
But if amyone would consider in all vengeances the perils and evils that might follow from vengeance-taking,
a man would never take vengeance, and that would be a harm;
for by the vengeance-taking are the wicked men distinguished from the good men,
and they that have will to do wickedness restrain their wicked purpose,
when they see the punishing and chastising of the trespassers."
And yet say I more, that just as a private person sins in taking vengeance on another man,
just so sins the judge if he do no vengeance on them that have deserved it.
For Seneca says thus: `That master,' he says, `is good who reproves scoundrels.'
And as Cassiodorus says, `A man dreads to do outrages when he knows and is aware
that it displeases the judges and the rulers.'
And another says, `The judge that dreads to do justice makes men scoundrels.'
And Saint Paul the Apostle says in his Epistle, when he writes unto the Romans, that
`the judges do not bear the spear without cause,
but they bear it to punish the scoundrels and evildoers and to defend the good men.'
If you will then take vengeance on your enemies, you shall turn to or bring your case to the judge
that has the jurisdiction upon them,
and he shall punish them as the law asks and requires."
"A," said Melibee, "this vengeance pleases me not at all.
I consider now and take heed how Fortune has nourished me from my childhood
and has helped me to pass many a difficult situation.
Now will I test her, believing that, with God's help, she shall help me to avenge my shame."
"Certainly," said Prudence, "if you will work by my advice, you shall not test Fortune in any way,
nor shall you rely on or bow unto her, according to the word of Seneca,
for `things that are foolishly done, and that are in hope of Fortune, shall never come to a good end.'
And, as the same Seneca says, `The more clear and the more shining that Fortune is,
the more brittle and the sooner broken she is.'
Trust not in her, for she is not steadfast nor stable,
for when thou believest her to be most sure or certain of her help,
she will fail thee and deceive thee.
And whereas you say that Fortune has nourished you from your childhood,
I say that to that degree should you have the less trust in her and in her wisdom.
For Seneca says, `Whatever man that is nourished by Fortune, she makes him a great fool.'
Now then, since you desire and ask vengeance, and the vengeance that is done according to the law
and before the judge pleases you not,
and the vengeance that is done in hope of Fortune is perilous and uncertain,
then have you no other remedy but to have your recourse
unto the Supreme Judge that avenges all villainies and wrongs.
And he shall avenge you according to what he himself witnesses, where he says,
`Leave the vengeance to me, and I shall do it.'"
Melibee answered, "If I do not avenge myself for the villainy that men have done to me,
I summon or announce to them that have done to me that villainy,
and all others, to do me another villainy.
For it is written, `If thou take no vengeance of an old villainy,
thou summonest thine adversaries to do thee a new villainy.'
And also for my patience men would do to me so much villainy that
I might neither bear nor sustain it,
and so should I be put down and considered too humble.
For men say, `In much suffering shall many things happen to thee which thou shalt not be able to endure.'"
"Certainly," said Prudence, "I grant you that over-much patience is not good.
But yet it follows not thereof that every person to whom men do villainy should take vengeance for it,
for that pertains and belongs entirely only to the judges, for they shall avenge the villainies and injuries.
And therefore those two authorities that you have spoken of above are only understood in the judges,
for when they allow over-much the wrongs and the villainies to be done without punishing,
they summon a man not entirely only to do new wrongs, but they command it. 
Also a wise man says that `the judge who corrects not the sinner commands and bids him to do sin.'
And the judges and rulers might in their land so much tolerate the scoundrels and evildoers
that they should, because of such tolerance, by the passage of time grow in such power and might
that they should put out the judges and the rulers from their places,
and at the last make them lose their lordships.
"But let us now suppose that you have leave to avenge yourself.
I say you are not of might and power right now to avenge yourself,
for if you will make comparison unto the might of your adversaries, you shall find in many things that
I have showed you ere this that their condition is better than yours.
And therefore say I that it is good for now that you suffer and be patient.
"Furthermore, you know well that according to the common saying, `it is a madness for a man to strive
with a stronger or a more mighty man than he is himself,
and to strive with a man of even strength -- that is to say,
with as strong a man as he is -- it is perilous/85
and to strive with a weaker man, it is folly.'
And therefore a man should flee striving as much as he might.
For Solomon says, `It is a great honor to a man to keep himself from quarrels and strife.'
And if it so befall or happen that a man of greater might and strength
than thou art do thee grievance,
take pains and busy thyself rather to still the same grievance than to avenge thyself.
For Seneca says that `he puts himself in great peril
that strives with a greater man than he is himself.'
And Cato says, `If a man of higher estate or degree, or more mighty than thou,
do thee annoyance or grievance, endure it,
for he that once has grieved thee, may another time relieve thee and help.'
Yet I assume (for the sake of argument) you have both might and permission to avenge yourself,
I say that there are very many things that should restrain you from vengeance-taking
and make you to incline to suffer, and to have patience
in the wrongs that have been done to you.
First of all, if you will consider the faults that are in your own person,
for which faults God has allowed you to have this tribulation, as I have said to you before.
For the poet says that `we ought patiently to take the tribulations
that come to us, when we think and consider that we have deserved to have them.'
And Saint Gregory says that `when a man considers well the number of his faults and of his sins,
the pains and the tribulations that he suffers seem the less unto him;
and inasmuch as he thinks his sins more heavy and grievous,
insomuch seems his pain the lighter and the easier unto him.'
Also you ought to incline and bow your heart
to adopt the patience of our Lord Jesus Christ, as says Saint Peter in his Epistles.
`Jesus Christ,' he says, `has suffered for us and given example to every man to follow and be guided by him,
for he did never sin, nor never came there a villainous word out of his mouth.
When men cursed him, he cursed them not, and when men beat him, he menaced them not.'
Also the great patience which the saints that are in Paradise have had in tribulations
that they have suffered, without their deserts or guilt,
ought much stir you to patience.
Furthermore you should force yourself to have patience,
considering that the tribulations of this world but little while endure and soon are passed and gone,
and the joy that a man seeks to have by patience in tribulations is ever-lasting,
according to what the Apostle says in his epistle.
`The joy of God,' he says, `is perdurable' -- that is to say, everlasting. 
Also think and believe steadfastly that he is not well trained, nor well taught,
who can not have patience or will not receive patience.
For Solomon says that `the doctrine and the wit of a man is known by patience.'
And in another place he says that `he that is patient governs himself with great prudence.'
And the same Solomon says, `The angry and wrathful man makes quarrels,
and the patient man moderates and stills them.'
He says also, `It is more worthy to be patient than to be very strong;
and he that may have the lordship of his own heart is more to be praised than he that
by his force or strength takes great cities.'
And therefore says Saint James in his Epistle that `patience is a great virtue of perfection.'"
"Certainly," said Melibee, "I grant you, dame Prudence, that patience is a great virtue of perfection;
but every man may not have the perfection that you seek;
nor am I of the number of very perfect men,
for my heart may never be in peace until the time it is avenged.
And although it be so that it was great peril to my enemies
to do me a villainy in taking vengeance upon me,
yet took they no heed of the peril, but fulfilled their wicked will and their desire.
And therefore it seems to me men ought not reprove me,
though I put myself in a little peril in order to avenge myself,
and though I do a great excess; that is to say, that I avenge one outrage by another."
"A," said dame Prudence, "you say your will and as you please,
but in no case of the world should a man do outrage nor excess to avenge himself.
For Cassiodorus says that `as evil does he that avenges himself by outrage as he that does the outrage.'
And therefore you shall avenge yourself after the order of justice; that is to say, by the law
and not by excess nor by outrage.
And also, if you will avenge yourself of the outrage of your adversaries
in other manner than justice commands, you sin.
And therefore says Seneca that `a man shall never avenge wickedness by wickedness." 
And if you say that justice asks a man to fight off violence by violence and fighting by fighting,
certainly you say truth, when the defense is done immediately without interval or without tarrying or delay,
to defend himself and not to avenge himself.
And it is fitting that a man put so much temperance in his defense
that men have no cause nor matter to reprove him that defends himself from excess and outrage, 
for otherwise it would be against reason.
By God, you know well that you make no defense
right now to defend yourself, but to avenge yourself;
and so it follows that you have no will to do your deed temperately.
And therefore it seems to me that patience is good. For Solomon says that
`he that is not patient shall have great harm.'"
"Certainly," said Melibee, "I grant you that when a man is impatient and angry with that
which touches him not and which pertains not unto him, though it harm him, it is no wonder.  
For the law says that `he is guilty that intrudes himself 
or meddles with such thing as pertains not unto him.'
And Solomon says that `he that meddles with the quarrels or strife of another man
is like to him that takes an hound by the ears.'
For just as he that takes a strange hound by the ears is at another time bitten by the hound,
in just the same way it is reasonable that he have harm who by his impatience meddles himself
with the quarrels of another man, whereas it pertains not unto him.
But you know well that this deed -- that is to say,
my grief and my suffering -- touches me very closely.
And therefore, though I am angry and impatient, it is no marvel.
And, with all due respect to you, I can not see that it might greatly harm me though I took vengeance.
For I am richer and more mighty than my enemies are;
and you well know that by money and by having great possessions
are all the things of this world governed.
And Solomon says that `all things obey to money.'"
When Prudence had heard her husband boast of his riches
and of his money, belittling the power of his adversaries,
she spoke and said in this manner:
"Certainly, dear sir, I grant you that you are rich and mighty
and that riches are good to those that have well gotten them and well know how to use them.
For just as the body of a man can not live without the soul,
no more than it can live without temporal goods.
And by riches a man get can himself great friends.
And therefore says Pamphilles: `If a cowherd's daughter,' says he, `is rich,
she may choose of a thousand men which she will take to her husband,
for, of a thousand men, not one will forsake her nor refuse her.'
And this Pamphilles says also, `If thou be very happy -- that is to say,
if thou be very rich -- thou shalt find a great number of fellows and friends.
And if thy fortune change that thou wax poor, farewell friendship and fellowship,
for thou shalt be alone without any company, except if it be the company of poor folk.'
And yet says this Pamphilles moreover that `they that are enslaved and in bondage by birth
shall be made worthy and noble by riches.'
And just as by riches there come many goods,
just so by poverty come there many harms and evils,
for great poverty constrains a man to do many evils.
And therefore Cassiodorus calls poverty the mother of ruin;
that is to say, the mother of overthrowing or falling down.
And therefore says Petrus Alphonsus, `One of the greatest adversities of this world is
when a man free by nature or by birth is constrained by poverty
to eat the alms of his enemy,'
and the same says Innocent in one of his books. He says that
`sorrowful and unfortunate is the condition of a poor beggar;
for if he does not beg for his food, he dies for hunger; 
and if be begs, he dies for shame, and yet necessity constrains him to beg.'
And says Solomon that `better it is to die than to have such poverty.'
And as the same Solomon says, `Better it is to die of bitter death
than to live in such a way.'
By these reasons that I have said unto you and by many other reasons that I could say,
I grant you that riches are good to them that get them well
and to them that well use those riches.
And therefore will I show you how you should behave, and how you should bear yourself
in gathering of riches, and in what manner you shall use them.
"First, you shall get them without great desire, by good deliberation, slowly and not over-hastily.
For a man that is too desiring to get riches devotes himself
first to theft, and to all other evils;
and therefore says Solomon, `He that hastens him too busily to wax rich shall be no innocent.'
He says also that `the riches that hastily come to a man soon
and easily go and pass from a man,
but those riches that come little by little always grow and multiply.'
And, sir, you shall get riches by your wit and by your travail unto your advantage,
and that without doing wrong or harm to any other person.
For the law says that `there makes no man himself rich, if he does harm to another person.'
This is to say, that nature prohibits and forbids justly that
any man make himself rich unto the harm of another person.
And Cicero says that `no sorrow, nor no dread of death, nor no thing
that may happen to a man, is so much against
nature as for a man to increase his own advantage to the harm of another man.
And though the great men and the mighty men get riches more easily than thou,
yet thou shalt not be idle nor slow to do thy benefit, for thou shalt in all ways flee idleness.'
For Solomon says that `idleness teaches a man to do many evils.'
And the same Solomon says that `he that works and busies himself to till his land shall eat bread,
but he that is idle and devotes himself to no business
nor occupation shall fall into poverty and die for hunger.'
And he that is idle and slow can never find suitable time to earn his profit.
For there is a versifier says that `the idle man excuses himself in winter because
of the great cold, and in summer by reason of the great heat.'
For these causes says Cato, `Wake and incline you not over-much to sleep,
for over-much rest nourishes and causes many vices.'
And therefore says Saint Jerome, `Do some good deeds that the devil,
which is our enemy, not find you unoccupied.'
For the devil takes not easily unto his power such as he finds occupied in good works.
"Then thus in getting riches you must flee idleness.
And afterward, you must use the riches which you have gotten by your wit and by your labor
in such a manner that men consider you not too niggardly, nor too frugal, nor too foolishly generous
-- that is to say, over-generous a spender.
For just as men blame an avaricious man because of his niggardliness and miserliness,
in the same way is he to blame that spends over-generously.
And therefore says Cato: `Use,' he says, `thy riches that thou hast gotten
in such a manner that men have no reason nor cause to call thee neither wretch nor miser,
for it is a great shame to a man to have a poor heart and a rich purse.'
He says also, `The goods that thou hast gotten, use them by measure;'
that is to say, spend them moderately,
for they who foolishly waste and squander the goods that they have,
when they have no more property of their own, they devote themselves to taking the goods of another man.
I say then that you must flee avarice,
using your riches in such a manner that men say not that your riches are buried
but that you have them in your power and in your control.
For a wise man reproves the avaricious man, and says thus in two verses:
`For what reason and why buries a man his goods by his great avarice,
and he knows well that by necessity he must die?
For death is the end of every man in this present life.'
And for what cause or reason he joins himself or he knits himself so fast unto his goods
that all his wits can not separate him or depart him from his goods,
and knows well, or ought know, that when he is dead
he shall nothing bear with him out of this world?
And therefore says Saint Austin that `the avaricious man is likened unto hell,
that the more it swallows the more desire it has to swallow and devour.'
And as well as you would shun to be called an avaricious man or miser,
as well should you keep yourself and govern yourself in such a way that men do not call you foolishly generous.
Therefore says Cicero: `The goods,' he says, `of thine house should not be hidden nor kept so close,
but that they might not be opened by pity and graciousness'
(that is to say, to give part to them that have great need),
`Nor thy goods must not be so open to be every man's goods.'
Afterward, in getting of your riches and in using them you must always have three things in your heart
(that is to say, our Lord God, conscience, and good name).
First, you shall have God in your heart,
and for no riches you shall do any thing which may in any manner displease God,
that is your creator and maker.
For after the word of Solomon, `It is better to have a little good with the love of God
than to have much good and treasure and lose the love of his Lord God.'
And the prophet says that `better it is to be a good man and have little good and treasure
than to be held a scoundrel and have great riches.'
And yet say I furthermore, that you should always do your business to get yourself riches,
providing that you get them with good conscience.
And the Apostle says that `there is nothing in this world of which
we should have so great joy as when our conscience bears us good witness.'
And the wise man says, `The substance of a man is very good,
when sin is not in man's conscience.'
Afterward, in getting of your riches and in using of them,
you must have great effort and greet diligence that your good name be always kept and conserved.
For Solomon says that `better it is and more it avails a man to have a good name
than to have great riches.'
And therefore he says in another place, `Do great diligence,' says Solomon,
`in keeping of thy friend and of thy good name;
for it shall longer abide with thee than any treasure, be it never so precious.'
And certainly he should not be called a gentle man who after God and good conscience, all other things left aside,
does his best efforts and effort to keep his good name.
And Cassiodorus says that `it is sign of a gentle heart
when a man loves and desires to have a good name.'
And therefore says Saint Austin that `there are two things that are necessary and needful,
and that is good conscience and good reputation;
that is to say, good conscience to thine own person inward and good reputation for thy neighbor outward.'
And he that trusts himself so much in his good conscience
that he displeases, and sets at naught his good name or reputation,
and cares not though he keep not his good name, is but a cruel churl.
"Sir, now have I showed you how you shall do in getting riches, and how you shall use them,
and I see well that for the trust that you have in your riches
you will provoke war and battle.
I advise you that you begin no war in trust of your riches,
for they do not suffice to maintain wars.
And therefore says a philosopher, `That man who desires and will continually have war, shall never have enough,
for the richer that he is, the greater expenditures must he make, if he will have worship and victory.'
And Solomon says that `the greater riches that a man has, the more spenders he has.'
And, dear sir, although it be so that for your riches you can have much folk,
yet it is not suitable, nor is it any good, to begin war whereas you can
in another manner have peace unto your honor and advantage.
For the victory of battles that are in this world lies not in great number or multitude
of the people, nor in the strength of man,
but it lies in the will and in the hand of our Lord God Almighty.
And therefore Judas Machabeus, who was God's knight,
when he had to fight against his adversary who has a greater number
and a greater multitude of folk and stronger than was this people of Machabee,
yet he comforted his little company, and said exactly in this way:
`As easily,' said he, `may our Lord God Almighty give victory to a few folk as to many folk,
for the victory of a battle comes not by the great number of people,
but it comes from our Lord God of heaven.'
And, dear sir, since there is no man certain if he be worthy that
God give him victory . . . or not, according to what Solomon says,
therefore every man should greatly dread to begin wars.
And because in battles many perils befall,
and happens another time that as soon is the great man slain as the little man;
and as it is written in the second Book of Kings,
`The deeds of battles are subject to chance and in no way certain,
for as easily is one hurt with one spear as another';
and for there is great peril in war, therefore should a man flee and shun war,
insomuch as a man may goodly (do so).
For Solomon says, `He who loves peril shall fall in peril.'"
After Dame Prudence had spoken in this manner, Melibee answered and said,
"I see well, dame Prudence, that by your fair words and by your reasons
that you have showed me, that the war not at all pleases you;
but I have not yet heard your advice, how I shall do in this urgent matter."
"Certainly," said she, "I advise you that you agree with your adversaries and that you have peace with them.
For Saint James says in his Epistles that `by agreeent and peace the small riches wax great,
and by debate and discord the great riches fall down.'
And you know well that one of the greatest and most excellent things
that is in this world is unity and peace.
And therefore said our Lord Jesus Christ to his apostles in this manner:
`Well happy and blessed are they that love and bring about peace, for they are called children of God.'" 
"A," said Melibee, "now see I well that you love not my honor nor my worthiness.
You know well that my adversaries have begun this debate and strife by their outrage,
and you see well that they neither require nor pray me for peace,
nor they ask not to be reconciled.
Will you then that I go and humble myself, and be subject to them, and beg them for mercy?
Indeed, that would not be to my honor. 
For just as men say that `over-great familiarity engenders contempt,' 
so fares it by too great humility or meekness."
Then began dame Prudence to make the outward appearance of wrath and said:
"Certainly, sir, with all due respect to you, I love your honor and your well-being
as I do my own, and ever have done;
nor you, nor any other, can say never the contrary.
And yet if I had said that you should have brought about the peace
and the reconciliation, I had not much mistaken me nor said amiss.
For the wise man says, `The dissension begins by another man, 
and the reconciling begins by thyself.'
And the prophet says, `Flee shrewdness and do goodness;
seek peace and follow it, as much as in thee is.'
Yet say I not that you should rather sue to your adversaries for peace than they should (offer peace) to you.
For I know well that you are so hard-hearted that you will do nothing for me.
And Solomon says, `He that has over-hard a heart, at the last he shall have bad luck and suffer misfortune.'"
When Melibee had heard dame Prudence make the appearance of wrath, he said in this manner:
"Dame, I pray you that you be not displeased by things that I say,
for you know well that I am angry and wrathful, and that is no wonder;
and they that are wrathful know not well what they do nor what they say.
Therefore the prophet says that `troubled eyes have no clear sight.'
But say and advise me as you like, for I am ready to do just as you will desire;
and if you reprove me for my folly,
I am the more obligated to love you and to praise you.
For Solomon says that `he that reproves him who does folly,
he shall find greater grace than he who deceives him by sweet words.'"
Then said dame Prudence, "I make no outward appearance of wrath nor anger, but for your great advantage.
For Solomon says, `He is more worthy that reproves or chides a fool for his folly,
showing him the outward appearance of wrath, 
than he who supports him and praises him in his misdoing and laughs at his folly.'
And this same Solomon says afterward that
`by the sorrowful visage of a man'
(that is to say by the sorry and heavy countenance of a man)
`the fool corrects and amends himself.'"
Then said Melibee, "I shall not know how to answer to
so many fair reasons as you set forth and show to me.
Say shortly your will and your advice, and I am all ready to fulfill and perform it."
Then dame Prudence uncovered all her will to him and said,
"I advise you," said she, "above all things , that you make peace between God and you,
and are reconciled unto him and to his grace.
For, as I have said to you here before this, God has allowed you
to have this tribulation and suffering for your sins.
And if you do as I tell you, God will send your adversaries unto you
and make them fall at your feet, ready to do your will and your commandments.
For Solomon says, `When the condition of man is pleasant and pleasing to God,
he changes the hearts of the man's adversaries and constrains them to beseech him for peace and for grace.'
And I pray you let me speak with your adversaries in a private place,
for they must not know that it is of your will or of your assent.
And then, when I know their will and their intent, I can advise you the more surely."
"Dame," said Melibee, "do your will and your pleasure;
for I put me wholly in your disposition and ordinance."
Then dame Prudence, when she saw the good will of her husband, considered and pondered in herself,
thinking how she might bring this urgent matter unto a good conclusion and to a good end.
And when she saw her time, she sent for these adversaries to come unto her into a private place
and showed wisely unto them the great goods that come of peace
and the great harms and perils that are in war,
and said to them in a goodly manner how that they ought to have great repentance
for the injury and wrong that they had done to Melibee her lord,
and unto her, and to her daughter.
And when they heard the goodly words of dame Prudence,
they were so taken and ravished and had such great joy of her that it was a wonder to tell.
"A, lady," said they, "you have showed unto us the blessing of sweetness,
according to the saying of David the prophet,
for the reconciliation which we are not worthy to have in any manner,
but we ought to request it with great contrition and humility,
that you of your great goodness have presented unto us.
Now see we well that the knowledge and the cunning of Solomon is very true.
For he says that `sweet words multiply and increase friends 
and make scoundrels to be gentle and meek.'
"Certainly," said they, "we put our actions and all our matters and cause all wholly in your good will
and are ready to obey to the speech and commandment of my lord 
And therefore, dear and benign lady, we pray you and beseech you as meekly as we know how and are able
that it be pleasing unto your great goodness to fulfill in deed your goodly words,
for we consider and acknowledge that we have offended and grieved my lord Melibee out of measure,
so far that we are not of power to make his amends.
And therefore we pledge and bind us and our friends to do all his will and his commandments.
But perhaps he has such heaviness and such wrath toward us because of our offense
that he will impose on us such a punishment as we can not bear nor sustain.
And therefore, noble lady, we beseech to your womanly pity
to take such thought in this urgent matter that
we nor our friends are not dispossessed nor destroyed through our folly."
"Certainly," said Prudence, "it is a hard thing and very perilous
that a man put himself entirely in the power of decision and judgment,
and in the might and power of his enemies.
For Solomon says, `Believe me, and give credence to what I shall say: I say,' said he,
`you people, folk and governors of holy church,
to thy son, to thy wife, to thy friend, nor to thy brother
give thou never power (over) nor mastery of thy body while thou livest.'
Now since he forbids that a man should give to his brother
nor to his friend the control of his body,
by a stronger reason he prohibits and forbids a man to give himself to his enemy.
And nevertheless I advise you that you mistrust not my lord,
for I know well and know truly that he is gentle and humble, generous, courteous,
and in no way desirous nor covetous of goods nor riches.
For there is nothing in this world that he desires, save only worship and honor.
Furthermore I know well and am very sure that he shall do nothing in this urgent matter without my advice,
and I shall so work in this cause that by the grace of our Lord God
you shall be reconciled unto us."
Then said they with one voice, "Worshipful lady, we put us
and our goods all fully in your will and power,
and are ready to come, what day that it pleases unto your noblesse to limit us or assign us,
to make our pledge and bond as strong as it pleases unto your goodness,
that we may fulfill the will of you and of my lord Melibee."
When dame Prudence had heard the answers of these men, she bad them go again secretly;
and she returned to her lord Melibee, and told him how she found his adversaries very repentant,
acknowledging very lowly their sins and trespass, and how they were ready to suffer any punishment,
requesting and praying him of mercy and pity.
Then said Melibee: "He is well worthy to have pardon
and forgiveness of his sin, who does not excuse his sin
but acknowledges it and repents himself, asking indulgence.
For Seneca says, `There is the remission and forgiveness, where the confession is,'
for confession is neighbor to innocence.
And he says in another place that `he who has shame of his sin and acknowledges
[it is worthy of having remission].' And therefore I assent and resolve myself to have peace;
but it is good that we do it not without the assent and will of our friends."
Then was Prudence very glad and joyful and said:
"Certainly, sir," said she, "you have well and goodly answered,
for just as by the advice, assent, and help of your friends
you have been stirred to avenge yourself and make war,
just so without their advice shall you not reconcile yourself nor have peace with your adversaries.
For the law says, `There is no thing so good in the natural course of events kind as for a thing
to be unbound by him who bound it.'"
And then dame Prudence without delay or tarrying sent immediately her messages for her kin
and for her old friends which that were true and wise,
and told them in detail in the presence of Melibee all this matter
as it is above expressed and declared,
and prayed them that they would give their counsel and advice what best were to do in this urgent matter.
And when Melibee's friends had taken her counsel and deliberation on the foresaid matter,
and had examined it by great effort and greet diligence,
they gave unqualified advice to have peace and rest,
and that Melibee should with good heart receive his adversaries to forgiveness and mercy.
And when dame Prudence had heard the assent of her lord Melibee, and the advice of his friends
agree with her will and her intention,
she was wonderfully glad in her heart and said:
"There is an old proverb," said she, "which says that `the goodness that thou can do this day, do it,
and abide not nor delay it not till tomorrow.'
And therefore I advise that you send your messengers, such as are discrete and wise,
unto your adversaries, telling them on your behalf
that if they will negotiate about peace and about harmony,
that they prepare themselves without delay or tarrying to come unto us."
Which thing was carried out in deed.
And when these trespassers and folk repenting of their follies
-- that is to say, the adversaries of Melibee --
had heard what these messengers said unto them,
they were just glad and joyful, and answered very meekly and benignly,
yielding thanks and gratitude to their lord Melibee and to all his company,
and prepared themselves without delay to go with the messengers 
and obey to the command of their lord Melibee.
And right away they took their way to the court of Melibee,
and took with them some of their true friends
to stand surety for them and to be their guarantors.
And when they were come to the presence of Melibee, he said to them these words:
"It stands thus," said Melibee, "and true it is, that you,
causeless and without logical explanation and reason,
have done great injuries and wrongs to me and to my wife Prudence and to my daughter also.
For you have entered into my house by violence,
and have done such outrage that all men know well that you have deserved the death.
And therefore will I know and learn of you
whether you will put the punishment and the chastising and the vengeance of this outrage in the power
of me and of my wife Prudence, or will you not?"
Then the wisest of them three answered for them all and said,
"Sir," said he, "we know well that we are unworthy to come unto the court
of so great a lord and so worthy as you are.
For we have so greatly transgressed, and have offended
and done wrong in such a way against your high lordship
that truly we have deserved the death.
But yet, for the great goodness and gentleness that all the world witnesses of your person,
we submit ourselves to the excellence and benignity of your gracious lordship,
and are ready to obey all your commandments,
beseeching you that of your merciful pity 
you will consider our great repentance and low submission
and grant us forgiveness of our outrageous trespass and offense.
For well we know that your liberal grace and mercy
stretch themselves farther into goodness than do our outrageous guilts and trespass into wickedness,
although it be so that cursedly and damnably we have sinned against your high lordship."
Then Melibee took them up from the ground very benignly,
and received their pledges and their bonds by their oaths upon their pledges and guarantors,
and assigned them a certain day to return unto his court
to accept and receive the sentence and judgment that Melibee would command
to be done on them by the causes aforesaid.
Which things arranged, every man returned to his house.
And when dame Prudence saw her time, she questioned and asked her lord Melibee
what vengeance he thought to take upon his adversaries.
To which Melibee answered and said, "Certainly," said he, "I think and purpose me fully
to dispossess them of all that ever they have and to put them in exile for ever."
"Certainly," said dame Prudence, "this would be a cruel sentence and much again reason.
For you are rich enough and have no need of other men's wealth,
and you might easily in this way get yourself a covetous name,
which is a vicious thing, and ought to be shunned by every good man.
For according to the saying of the word of the Apostle, `Greed is root of all harms.'
And therefore it were better for you to lose so much wealth of your own
than to take their wealth in this manner,
for better it is to lose wealth with honor than it is to acquire wealth with villainy and shame.
And every man ought to do his best efforts and his main concern to get himself a good name.
And yet shall he not only busy himself in keeping of his good name,
but he shall also strive always to do something by which he may renew his good name.
For it is written that `the old good reputation or good name of a man is soon gone
and passed, when it is not renewed nor restored.'
And as touching that you say you will exile your adversaries,
that thinks me much against reason and out of measure,
considered the power that they have given you upon themselves.
And it is written that `he is worthy to lose his privilege that misuses
the might and the power that is given him.'
And I assume (for the sake of argument) you might impose on them that punishment by justice and by law,
which I believe you can not do;
I say perhaps you could not put it to execution,
and then it would be likely to return to the war as it was before.
And therefore, if you want men to do you obedience, you must judge more courteously;
this is to say, you must give more easy sentences and judgments.
For it is written that `he who most courteously commands, to him men most obey.'
And therefore I pray you that in this necessity and in this urgent matter  
you endeavor to overcome your heart.
For Seneca says that `he that overcomes his heart overcomes twice.'
And Cicero says, `There is no thing so commendable in a great lord
as when he is gentle and meek, and calms himself easily.
And I pray you that you will forbear now to do vengeance,
in such a manner that your good name may be kept and conserved,
and that men may have cause and matter to praise you for pity and for mercy,
and that you have no cause to repent yourself of thing that you do.
For Seneca says, `He overcomes in an evil manner who repents himself of his victory.'
Wherefore I pray you, let mercy be in your heart,
to the effect and intent that God Almighty have mercy on you in his last judgment.
For Saint James says in his Epistle: `Judgment without mercy shall be done
to him that has no mercy for another person.'"
When Melibee had heard the great logical arguments and reasons of 
dame Prudence, and her wise counsels and teachings,
his heart began to incline to the will of his wife, considering her true intent,
and conformed him immediately and assented fully to work according to her advice,
and thanked God, of whom proceeds all virtue and all goodness,
that sent him a wife of so great discretion.
And when the day came that his adversaries should appear in his presence,
he spoke unto them very goodly, and said in this manner:
"Although it be so that of your pride and high presumption 
and folly, and of your negligence and ignorance,
you have misbehaved yourself and trespassed unto me,
yet forasmuch as I see and behold your great humility
and that you are sorry and repentant of your guilts,
it constrains me to do you grace and mercy.
Wherefore I receive you to my grace
and forgive you completely all the offenses, injuries, and 
wrongs that you have done against me and mine,
to this effect and to this end, that God of his endless mercy
will at the time of our dying forgive us our guilts
that we have trespassed to him in this wretched world.
For doubtless, if we are sorry and repentant of the sins and guilts which we have trespassed
in the sight of our Lord God,
he is so free and so merciful
that he will forgive us our guilts
and bring us to the bliss that never has end." Amen.
By the time that the Manciple had his tale all ended,
The sun from the meridian was descended
So low that he was not, to my sight,
More than nine and twenty degrees in altitude.
Four of the clock it was then, as I suppose,
For eleven feet, or little more or less,
My shadow was there at that same time,
Of such feet as if my height were divided
Into six feet equal in size.
Therewith the moon's exaltation --
I mean Libra -- steadily ascended
As we were entering at edge of a village;
For which our Host, since he was accustomed to guide,
On this occasion, our jolly company,
Said in this manner: "Gentlemen, every one,
Now we lack no tales more than one.
Fulfilled is my plan and my decree;
I believe that we have heard from each social class;
Almost fulfilled is all my governance.
I pray to God, give right good luck to him,
Who tells this tale to us pleasingly.
"Sire priest," said he, "art thou a vicar?
Or art thou a parson? Tell the truth, by thy faith!
Be whatever thou may be, break thou not our rules;
For every man, save thou, has told his tale.
Unbuckle and show us what is in thy bag;
For truly, it seems to me from your appearance
Thou shouldest well conclude a long discourse.
Tell us a fictional tale right now, for cock's bones!"
This Parson answered, immediately,
"Thou gettest no fiction told by me,
For Paul, who writes unto Timothy,
Reproves them that abandon truthfulness
And tell fictional tales and such wretched things.
Why should I sow chaff out of my fist,
When I can sow wheat, if I so wish?
For which I say, if you want to hear
Morality and virtuous subject matter,
And providing that you will give me your attention,
I will very gladly, to Christ's reverence,
Provide you with permissible pleasure, insofar as I can.
But trust well, I am a Southern man;
I can not recite `rum, ram, ruf,' letter by letter,
And, God knows, rime I consider but little better;
And therefore, if you wish -- I will not deceive you --
I will yow tell a merry tale in prose
To conclude all this festivity and make an end.
And Jesus, for his grace, send me wit
To show you the way, in this journey,
Of that same perfect glorious pilgrimage
That is called Jerusalem celestial.
And if you agree, I shall right now
Begin my tale, for which I pray you
To tell your decision; I can say nothing better.
"But nonetheless, this meditation
I put it ever subject to correction
By clerks, for I am not learned in texts;
I take from them only the meaning, trust well.
Therefore I make this declaration
That I will be subject to correction."
Upon this word we have quickly assented,
For, as it seemed, it was the best to do --
To end in some virtuous subject matter,
And to give him time and attention,
And told our Host he should to him say
That we all pray him to tell his tale.
Our Host had the words for us all;
"Sire priest," said he, "now may good fortune come to you!
Tell," said he, "your meditation.
But make haste; the sun is about to go down;
Be fruitful, and that in little time,
And to do well God send you his grace!
Say what you wish, and we will gladly hear."
And with that word he said in this manner.
When ended was my tale of Melibee,
And of Prudence and her goodness,
Our Host said, "On my faith,
And by that precious body of Madrian,
(I swear that) I had rather than have a barrel of ale
That Goodelief, my wife, had heard this tale!
For she is in no way of such patience
As was this Melibeus' wife Prudence.
By God's bones, when I beat my knaves,
She brings me forth the great knobby clubs,
And cries, `Slay the dogs every one
And break them, both back and every bone!'
"And if any neighbor of mine
Will not in church bow to my wife,
Or be so bold as to offend her,
When she comes home she shakes her fists in my face,
And cries, `False coward, avenge thy wife!
By God's bones, I will have thy knife,
And thou shalt have my spinning staff and go spin!'
From daybreak to nightfall right thus she will begin.
`Alas,' she says, `that ever I was created
To wed a milksop, or a coward ape,
That will be browbeaten by every body!
Thou darest not defend thy wife's right!'
"This is my life, unless I will fight;
And out at door immediately I must hasten myself,
Or else I am as good as lost, unless I
Be like a wild lion, fool-hardy.
I know well some day she will make me slay 
Some neighbor, and then be on the run; 
For I am perilous with knife in hand,
Albeit that I dare not stand up to her,
For she is strong in fighting, by my faith:
That shall he find that does or says something amiss to her -- 
But let us pass away from this matter.
"My lord, the Monk," said he, "cheer up,
For you must tell a tale truly.
Lo, Rochester stands here near by!
Ride forth, my own lord, do not interrupt our game.
But, by my pledged word, I know not your name.
Which shall I call you -- my lord Don John,
Or Don Thomas, or else Don Albon?
Of what monastic order are you, by your father's kin?
I vow to God, thou hast a very handsome complexion;
It is a noble pasture where thou goest to eat.
Thou art not like a penitent or a ghost:
Upon my faith, thou art some officer,
Some worthy sexton, or some provisioner, 
For by my father's soul, according to my judgment,
Thou art a master when thou art at home;
No poor cloistered monk, nor no novice,
But a governor, wily and wise,
And, in addition to that, of muscles and of bones
A very handsome person indeed.
I pray to God, give him ruination
Who first brought thee unto the monastic life!
Thou wouldest have been a chicken-copulator indeed,
If thou haddest as much permission as thou hast power
To perform all thy desire in procreation,
Thou would have begotten very many a creature.
Alas, why wearest thou so wide a cope?
God give me sorrow, unless, if I were a pope,
Not only thou, but every mighty man,
Though he had a tonsure very prominently upon his head,
Should have a wife; for all the world is lost!
Religion has taken up all the best
At copulating, and we laymen are shrimps.
Of feeble trees there come weak offshoots.
This makes our heirs to be so scrawny
And feeble that they can not well beget children.
This makes it that our wives want to try out
Folk in holy orders, for you can better pay
Venus' payments than we can;
God knows, you pay with no inferior coins!
But be not angry, my lord, though I am joking.
Very often I have heard a truth said in jest!"
This worthy Monk took all in patience,
And said, "I will devote all my efforts,
So far as it is conducive to propriety,
To tell you a tale, or two, or three.
And if you desire to listen to me,
I will tell you the life of Saint Edward;
Or else, first, I will tell tragedies,
Of which I have a hundred in my cell.
Tragedy means a true narrative,
As old books make us remember,
Of one who stood in great prosperity,  
And is fallen out of high degree
Into misery, and ends wretchedly.
And ordinarily they are in verses
Of six feet, which men call hexameters.
Many are also composed in prose,
And also in meters of many and various sorts.
Lo, this explanation ought to suffice enough.
"Now hearken, if it pleases you to hear.
But first I beseech you in this matter,
Though I do not tell these things in chronological order,
Be it of popes, emperors, or kings,
According to their times, as men find written,
But tell some of them before and some behind,
As it now comes unto my memory,
Hold me excused for my ignorance."
I will bewail in the manner of tragedy
The harm of those who stood in high degree,
And fell so that there was no remedy
To bring them out of their adversity.
For certainly, when Fortune desires to flee,
No man can withstand her onward movement.
Let no man trust on blind prosperity;
Take warning from these examples true and old. <P>
At Lucifer, though he was an angel
And not a man, at him will I begin.
For though Fortune may harm no angel,
From high degree yet for his sin he fell 
Down into hell, in which he is yet.
O Lucifer, brightest of all angels,
Now art thou Sathanas, that mayst not depart
Out of misery, in which thou art fallen.
Lo Adam, in the field of Damascus
With God's own finger was he wrought,
And not begotten of man's unclean sperm,
And ruled all paradise save for one tree.
Had never worldly man so high degree
As Adam, until he for misconduct
Was driven out of his high prosperity
To labor, and to hell, and to ruin.
Lo Sampson, whose birth was announced
By the angel long before his nativity,
And was to God Almighty consecrated,
And stood in noble estate while he could see.
There was never such another as was he,
To speak of strength, and bravery as well;
But to his wives he told his secret,
Through which he slew himself for wretchedness.
Sampson, this noble almighty champion,
Without any weapon save his two hands,
He slew and tore all to pieces the lion,
(While he was) walking toward his wedding by the way.
His false wife could him so please and earnestly plead
Until she knew his secrets; and she, untrue,
Unto his foes his secrets did betray,
And abandoned him, and took another new lover.
Three hundred foxes Sampson took for ire,
And all their tails he tied together,
And set the foxes' tails all on fire,
For he on every tail had tied a torch;
And they burned all the grain crops in that land,
And all their olive trees, and vines also.
A thousand men he slew also with his hand,
And had no weapon but an ass's jawbone.
When they were slain, he was so thirsty that he
Was well nigh lost, for which he prayed
That God would on his pain have some pity
And send him drink, or else he must die;
And of this ass's jawbone, that was dry,
Out of a molar sprang right away a well,
Of which he drank enough, shortly to say;
Thus God helped him, as The Book of Judges can tell.
By sheer force at Gaza on one night,
Despite the Philistines of that city,
The gates of the town he has plucked up,
And on his back he has carried them
High on a hill where men could see them.
O noble, almighty Sampson, beloved and dear,
Had thou not told to women thy secret,
In all this world there had not been thy peer!
This Sampson never drank alcoholic drinks nor wine,
Nor on his head came any razor or scissors,
By command of the divine messenger,
For all his powers were in his hair.
And fully twenty winters, year by year,
He had the governance of Israel.
But soon shall he weep many a tear,
For women shall bring him to misfortune!
Unto his sweetheart Dalilah he told
That all his strength lay in his hair,
And falsely to his foemen she sold him.
And sleeping on her bosom upon one day,
She contrived to clip or shear his hair away,
And made his foemen know all his craft;
And when they found him in this condition,
They bound him securely and put out his eyes.
But before his hair was clipped or shaven,
There was no bond with which men could bind him;
But now is he in prison in a cave,
Where they made him grind at the mill.
O noble Sampson, strongest of mankind,
O formerly judge, in glory and in riches!
Now mayst thou weep with thy blind eyes,
Since thou from prosperity art fallen into wretchedness.
The end of this captive was as I shall say.
His foemen made a feast upon one day,
And made him as their fool play before them;
And this was in a temple of great magnificence.
But at the last he made a terrifying assault,
For he shook two pillars and made them fall,
And down fell temple and all, and there it lay --
And slew himself, and also all his foemen.
This is to say, every one of the princes,
And also three thousand bodies, were there slain
By the falling of the great temple of stone.
Of Sampson now I will say no more.
Beware by this example old and plain 
That no men tell their secrets to their wives
Of such things as they would earnestly keep secret,
If it concerns their limbs or their lives.
Of Hercules, the supreme conqueror,
His works sing his praise and high renown;
For in his time he was the flower of strength.
He slew and tore off the skin of the lion;
He laid down the boast of the Centaurs;
He slew the Harpies, the fierce cruel birds;
He seized the golden apples of the dragon;
He dragged Cerberus, the hound, out of Hell;
He slew the cruel tyrant Busirus
And made his horses eat him, flesh and bone;
He slew the fiery venomous serpent;
He broke one of Achelous' two horns;
And he slew Cacus in a cave of stone;
He slew the giant Antheus the strong;
He slew the grisly boar, and that very quickly;
And long bore the heaven on his neck.
Was never a person, since this world began,
That slew as many monsters as did he.
Throughout this wide world his name ran,
What for his strength and for his great goodness,
And he went to see every realm.
He was so strong that no man could prevent him.
At both ends of the world, says Trophee,
In stead of boundary markers he set a pillar.
This noble champion had a sweetheart,
Who was called Dianira, fresh as May;
And as these clerks make mention,
She has sent him a shirt, fresh and gay.
Alas, this shirt -- alas and woe oh woe! --
Was so skillfully envenomed indeed
That before he had worn it half a day
It made all his flesh fall from his bones.
But nonetheless some clerks excuse her
By one who was called Nessus, who made it.
However it may be, I will not accuse her;
But on his back all naked he wore this shirt
Until his flesh was blackened because of the venom.
And when he saw no other remedy,
He has himself covered over in hot coals,
For with no venom did he deign to die.
Thus died this worthy, mighty Hercules.
Lo, who can trust on Fortune for any time?
For he who follows (the ways of) all this dangerous world
Before he is aware is often laid very low.
Very wise is he who can know himself!
Be wary, for when Fortune wants to deceive,
Then she waits to overthrow her man 
By such a means as he would least suppose.
The mighty throne, the precious treasure,
The glorious scepter, and royal majesty
That had the king Nebuchadnessar
With tongue can hardly be described.
He twice won the city of Jerusalem;
The vessels of the temple he took with him.
At Babylon was his sovereign throne,
In which he had his glory and his delight.
The fairest children of the blood royal
Of Israel he had gelded indeed,
And made each of them to be his slave.
Among others Daniel was one,
Who was the wisest child of them all,
For he expounded the dreams of the king,
Whereas in Chaldea there was no clerk
Who knew what his dreams meant. 
This proud king had made a statue of gold,
Sixty cubits long and seven in breadth,
To which image both young and old
Commanded he to bow down, and hold in veneration,
Or in a furnace, full of red flames,
He who would not obey shall be burned.
But never would assent to (do) that deed
Daniel nor his two young fellows.
This king of kings was proud and arrogant;
He supposed that God, who sits in majesty,
Could not deprive him of his estate.
But suddenly he lost his high office,
And like a beast he seemed to be,
And ate hay like an ox, and lay outside
In rain; with wild beasts walked he
Until a certain number of years had passed.
And his hair grew to be like an eagle's feathers;
His nails were like a bird's claws;
Until God released him (after) a certain (number of) years,
And gave him back his wits, and then with many a tear
He thanked God, and always in his life in fear
Was he to do amiss or again trespass;
And until that time he was laid on his bier
He knew that God was full of might and grace.
His son, who was called Belshazzar,
Who held the reign after his father's day,
He by (the example of) his father could not be warned,
For he was proud of heart and of behavior,
And also he was always an idolater.
His high estate made him confident in pride;
But Fortune cast him down, and there he lay,
And suddenly his reign began to break apart.
A feast he made for all his lords
Upon a time and bade them be happy;
And then his officers he did call:
"Go, bring forth the vessels," said he,
"Which my father in his flourishing time
Robbed out of the temple of Jerusalem;
And to our high gods we give thanks 
For the honor that our elders left with us."
His wife, his lords, and his concubines
Always drank, while their appetites lasted
Various wines out of these noble vessels.
And on a wall this king cast his eyes 
And saw a hand, armless, that wrote very fast,
For fear of which he quaked and sighed deeply.
This hand that so deeply terrified Belshazzar 
Wrote Mane, techel, phares, and no more.
In all that land was no magician
Who could explain what this text meant;
But Daniel explained it right away,
And said, "King, God to thy father lent
Glory and honor, reign, treasure, income;
And he was proud and not at all dreaded God,
And therefore God sent great vengeance upon him,
And took away from him the reign that he had.
"He was cast out of man's company;
With asses was his habitation,
And ate hay as a beast in wet (weather) and dry
Until he knew, by grace and by reason,
That God of heaven has domination
Over every reign and every creature;
And then had God on him compassion,
And to him restored his reign and his bodily form.
"Also thou, who art his son, art proud also,
And knowest all these things truly,
And art rebel to God, and art his foe.
Thou drank also of his vessels boldly;
Thy wife also, and thy wenches, sinfully
Drank of the same vessels various wines;
And worship false gods cursedly;
Therefore to thee is ordained very great pain.
"This hand was sent from God that on the wall
Wrote Mane, techel, pares, trust me;
Thy reign is done; thou art of no account at all.
Broken up is thy kingdom, and it shall be
Given to Medes and to Persians," said he.
And that same night this king was slain,
And Darius occupies his throne,
Though for this he had neither right nor law.
Gentlemen, example may you take from this
How in lordship is no security,
For when Fortune will forsake a man,
She bears away his reign and his riches,
And also his friends, both high ranking and low.
For whatever man who has friends because of Fortune,
Misfortune will make them enemies, I believe;
This proverb is very true and very common.
Zenobia, of Palmyra queen,
As Persians write of her nobility,
So worthy was in arms and so fierce
That no person passed her in boldness,
Nor in lineage, nor in other noble traits.
Of the blood of kings of Persia is she descended.
I say not that she had most beauty,
But of her shape she could not be improved.
From her childhood I find that she fled
Duties of women, and to the woods she went,
And many a wild hart's blood she shed
With broad-headed arrows that she to them sent.
She was so swift that she quickly seized them;
And when she was older, she would kill
Lions, leopards, and bears all torn to pieces,
And in her arms handled them at her will.
She dared to seek wild beasts' dens,
And to run in the mountains all the night,
And to sleep under a bush, and she could also
Wrestle, by sheer force and sheer strength,
With any young man, were he never so strong.
There might no thing withstand her arms.
She kept her maidenhead from every person;
She disdained to be bound to no man.
But at the last her friends have married her
To Odenake, a prince of that country,
Although it was so that she long delayed them.
And you must understand that he
Had such fantasies as had she.
But nonetheless, when they were knit together,
They lived in joy and in felicity,
For each of them held the other beloved and dear,
Save one thing: that she would never assent,
In any way, that he should by her lie
But once, for it was her full intention
To have a child, the world to multiply;
And as soon as she could see
That she was not with child by means of that deed,
Then would she allow him to do his desires
Again, and only but once, no doubt.
And if she were with childe at that time,
No more should he play that same game
Until fully forty [weeks] were past;
Then would she once allow him to do the same.
Even if this Odenake were wild or tame,
He got no more of her, for thus she said:
It was to wives lechery and shame,
In any other case, if men had sexual relations with them. 
Two sons by this Odenake had she,
Whom she kept in virtue and learning.
But now unto our tale we turn.
I say, so worshipful a creature,
And wise also, and generous in moderation,
So assiduous in the war, and courtly also,
Nor more labor could in war endure,
Was none, though through all this world men should seek.
Her rich furnishings could not be told,
As well in utensils as in her clothing.
She was all clad in precious stones and in gold,
And also she did not neglect, for any hunting,
To have of various tongues full knowing,
When she had leisure; and to endeavor
To learn books was all her desire,
How she in virtue might spend her life.
And shortly of this history to treat,
So doughty was her husband and also she,
That they conquered many great realms
In the orient, with many a fair city
Belonging unto the majesty
Of Rome, and with strong hand held them very tightly,
Nor never could their foemen make them flee,
Always while Odenake's days lasted.
Their battles, whoever may wish to read them,
Against Shapur the king and many others,
And how all this business happened in actuality,  
Why she conquered and what legal claim she had to it,
And after, of her troubles and her woe,
How she was besieged and taken --
Let him unto my master Petrarch go,
Who wrote at length about this, I guarantee.
When Odenake was dead, she mightily
Defended the country, and with her own hand
Against her foes she fought so cruelly
That there was no king nor prince in all that land
That he was not glad, if he found such grace,
That she would not make war upon his land.
With her they made alliance by covenant 
To be in peace, and let her ride  about and enjoy herself.
The Emperor of Rome, Claudius
Nor, before him, the Roman Galien,
Dared never be so courageous
Nor any Armenian, nor any Egyptian,
Nor Syrian, nor any Arabian,
Within the field that dared fight with her,
Lest she would slay them with her hands,
Or with her troop put them to flight.
In kings' clothing went her two sons,
As heirs of all their father's reigns,
And Hermanno and Thymalao
Their names were, as Persians call them.
But always Fortune has bitterness in her honey;
This mighty queen can no longer endure.
Fortune out of her reign made her fall
To wretchedness and to misfortune.
Aurelian, when the governance
Of Rome came into his two hands,
He prepared to do vengeance upon this queen.
And with his legions he took his way
Toward Zenobia, and shortly to say,
He made her flee, and at the last seized her,
And put her in fetters, and also her two children,
And won the land, and home to Rome he went.
Amongst other things that he won,
Her chariot, that was wrought with gold and precious stones,
This great Roman, this Aurelian,
Has with him led, so that men should see it.
Before his triumphal procession she walks,
With gilded chains hanging on her neck.
Crowned was she, in accord with her rank,
And her clothing loaded full of precious stones.
Alas, Fortune! She that formerly was
Fearsome to kings and to emperors,
Now all the people stare on her, alas!
And she who wore helmets in violent battles
And won by force strong towns and towers,
Shall on her head now wear a woman's headdress;
And she that bore the scepter full of flowers
Shall bear a spinning staff, to pay for her living costs.
O noble, O worthy Pedro, glory of Spain,
Whom Fortune held so high in majesty,
Well ought men complain of thy piteous death!
Out of thy land thy brother made thee flee,
And after, at a siege, by trickery,
Thou were betrayed and led unto his tent,
Where he with his own hand slew thee,
Succeeding to thy reign and to thy income.
The field of snow, with the eagle of black therein,
Caught by the bird-lime on a rod colored like the burning coal,
He brewed this cursedness and all this sin.
The wicked nest was worker of this violent act.
Not Charlemagne's Oliver, who always took heed
Of truth and honor, but of Armorica
Ganelon-Oliver, corrupt for a bribe,
Brought this worthy king into such a plight.
O worthy Pierre, king of Cyprus, also,
Who won Alexandria by great strength,
To very many a heathen thou wroughtest great woe,
Of which thine own lieges had envy,
And for no thing but for thy chivalry
They in thy bed have slain thee in the morning.
Thus can Fortune govern and guide her wheel,
And out of joy bring men to sorrow.
Great Bernabo Viscounti of Milan,
God of delight and scourge of Lombardy,
Why should I not thy misfortune recount,
Since in rank thou had climbed so high?
Thy brother's son, who was thy double kinsman,
For he was thy nephew and son-in-law,
Within his prison made thee to die --
But why nor how thou were slain I know not.
Of the anguish of Earl Ugolino of Pisa 
There can no tongue tell for pity.
But a little way out of Pisa stands a tower,
In which tower in prison he was put,
And with him are his three little children;
The eldest was scarcely five years of age.
Alas, Fortune, it was great cruelty
To put such birds in such a cage!
He was damned to die in that prison,
For Roger, who was bishop of Pisa,
Had on him made a false accusation,
Through which the people did rise against him
And put him into prison in such manner
As you have heard, and meat and drink he had
So small that it just barely can suffice,
And in addition it was very poor and bad.
And on a day befell that in that hour
When his meal was accustomed to be brought,
The jailer shut the doors of the tower.
He heard it well, but he spoke absolutely nothing,
And in his heart straightway there fell a thought
That they for hunger would make him die.
"Alas!" said he, "Alas, that I was wrought!"
Therewith the tears fell from his eyes.
His young son, who was three years of age,
Unto him said, "Father, why do you weep?
When will the jailer bring our soup?
Is there no morsel of bread that you do keep?
I am so hungry that I can not sleep.
Now would God that I might sleep forever!
Then hunger should not creep in my belly;
There is nothing, but food, that I would rather have." 
Thus day by day this child began to cry,
Until in his father's bosom down it lay,
And said, "Farewell, father, I must die!"
And kissed his father, and died the same day.
And when the woeful father saw him dead,
For woe his two arms he began to bite,
And said, "Alas, Fortune, and woe oh woe!
I can blame thy false wheel for all my woe."
His children supposed that it was for hunger
That he gnawed on his arms, and not for woe,
And said, "Father, do not so, alas!
But rather eat the flesh upon us two.
Our flesh thou gave us, take our flesh from us,
And eat enough" -- right thus they to him said,
And after that, within a day or two,
They laid themselves down in his lap and died.
Himself, despaired, also for hunger died;
Thus ended is this mighty Earl of Pisa.
From high estate Fortune cut him away. 
Of this tragedy it ought enough suffice;
Whoever wants to hear it in a longer version,
Read the great poet of Italy
Who is called Dante, for he can all narrate
In great detail; not one word will he lack.
Although Nero was as vicious
As any fiend that lies very low down (in Hell),
Yet he, as Suetonius tells us,
Had this wide world in subjection,
Both east and west, [south], and north.
Of rubies, sapphires, and of white pearls
Were all his clothes embroidered from head to toe,
For he in gems greatly did delight.
More fond of luxury, more pompous in behavior,
More proud than he was never emperor;
That same clothing that he had worn one day,
After that time he wanted never to see it.
Nets of gold thread had he in great plenty
To fish in Tiber, when he wished to amuse himself.
His desires were all lawful in his legal code,
For Fortune as his friend would obey him.
He burned Rome for his pleasure;
The senators he slew upon one day
To hear how men would weep and cry;
And slew his brother, and by his sister lay.
His mother he put in piteous situation,
For he slit her womb to behold
Where he was conceived -- so woe oh woe  
That he reckoned so little of his mother!
No tear out of his eyes for that sight
Came, but he said, "A fair woman was she!"
Great wonder is how that he could or might
Be judge of her dead beauty.
He commanded that the wine be brought to him ,
And drank straightway -- no other mourning he made.
When might is joined unto cruelty,
Alas, too deep will the venom go!
In youth this emperor had a master
To teach him literature and courtesy,
For of morality he was the flower,
In his time, unless books lie;
And while this master had of him mastery,
He made him so cunning and so humble
That long time it was before tyranny
Or any vice dared unloose itself upon him.
This Seneca, of whom I tell,
Because Nero had of him such dread,
For he would always chastise him from vices 
Discreetly, as by word and not by deed --
"Sire," would he say, "an emperor must of necessity 
Be virtuous and hate tyranny --"
For which he in a bath made him to bleed
On both his arms, until he had to die.
This Nero had also the custom 
In youth to rise in the presence of his master ,
Which afterward seemed to him a greet grievance;
Therefore he made him die in this manner.
But nonetheless this Seneca the wise
Chose in a bath to die in this manner
Rather than have another form of torment;
And thus has Nero slain his dear master.
Now it happened that Fortune no longer desired
The high pride of Nero to cherish,
For though he may be strong, yet was she stronger.
She thought thus: "By God! I am too foolish
To set a man that is filled full of vice
In high degree, and call him emperor.
By God, out of his throne I will snatch him;
When he least expects it, the most quickly shall he fall."
The people rose upon him on one night
For his wickedness, and when he espied it,
Out of his doors right away he has hastened himself
Alone, and where he supposed to have been allied
He knocked fast, and always the more he cried
The tighter they shut all the doors.
Then he knew well, he had himself deluded,
And went his way; no longer dared he call.
The people cried and made a tumult up and down,
That with his ears he heard how they said,
"Where is this false tyrant, this Nero?"
For fear almost out of his wit he went,
And to his gods pitiably he prayed
For help, but it could not happen.
For dread of this it seemed to him that he died,
And he ran into a garden to hide himself.
And in this garden found he two churls 
That sat by a fire, great and red.
And to these two churls he did pray
To slay him and to strike off his head,
So that to his body, when he was deed,
No insult was done for his ill fame.
Himself he slew, he knew no better course of action,
About which Fortune laughed, and amused herself.
Was never captain under a king
That put more reigns in subjection,
Nor was stronger in all things concerning the field of battle,
In his time, nor greater of renown,
Nor more arrogant in high presumption
Than Holofernes, whom Fortune always kissed
So wantonly, and led him up and down
Until his head was off, before he knew it.
Not only that this world had him in awe
For (fear of) loss of riches or liberty,
But he made every man renounce his religion.
"Nebuchadnezzar was god," said he;
"No other god should be adored."
Against his command no person dared trespass,
Save in Bethulia, a strong city,
Where Eliachim (Joachim) was a priest of that place.
But take heed of the death of Holofernes:
Amid his host he lay drunk at night,
Within his tent, large as is a barn,
And yet, for all his pomp and all his might,
Judith, a woman, as he lay on his back
Sleeping, smote off his head, and from his tent
Very secretly she stole (away) from every person,
And with his head unto her town she went.
What needs it of king Antiochus
To tell his high royal majesty,
His high pride, his venomous deeds?
For such another was there no one like him.
Read who he was in Maccabees,
And read the proud words that he said,
And why he fell from high prosperity,
And on a hill how wretchedly he died.
Fortune had elevated him so in pride
That truly he supposed he might attain
Unto the stars upon every side,
And in a scales weigh each mountain,
And all the floods of the sea restrain.
And God's people had he most in hate;
Them he would slay in torment and in pain,
Supposing that God could not reduce his pride.
And because Nicanor and Timotheus
By Jews were vanquished completely,
Unto the Jews such a hate had he
That he ordered his chariot prepared very hastily,
And swore, and said very angrily 
Unto Jerusalem he would (go) immediately
To wreak his ire on it very cruelly;
But of his purpose he was prevented very soon.
God because of his threatening so sorely smote him
With invisible wound, ever incurable,
That in his guts it carved so and bit
That his pains were intolerable.
And certainly the punishment was reasonable,
For many a man's gut did he pain.
But from his cursed and damnable purpose,
For all his pain, he would not restrain himself,
But commanded straightway to prepare his host;
And suddenly, before he was aware of it,
God laid low all his pride and all his boast.
For he so sorely fell out of his throne
That it tore to pieces his limbs and his skin,
So that he might neither walk nor ride,
But in a sedan chair men carried him about,
All badly bruised, both back and side.
The vengeance of God smote him so cruelly
That through his body wicked worms crept,
And in addition to all that he stank so horribly
That no one of all his household that served him,
Whether he stayed awake or else slept,
Could not endure the stink of him.
In this affliction he wailed and also wept,
And acknowledged God lord of every creature.
To all his host and to himself also
Full loathsome was the stink of his decaying body;
No man could bear him in any way.
And in this stink and this horrible pain,
He died very wretchedly on a mountain.
Thus has this robber and this homicide,
That many a man made to weep and mourn,
Such reward as belongs to pride.
The history of Alexander is so commonly known
That every person who has good judgment
Has heard something or all of his fortune.
This wide world, in the end,
He won by strength, or for his high renown
They were glad to send unto him (to sue) for peace .
The pride of man and beast he laid low,
Wherever he came, unto the world's end.
Comparison might never yet be made
Between him and another conqueror;
For all this world for dread of him has trembled.
He was flower of knighthood and of nobility;
Fortune made him the heir of her honor.
Save wine and women, no thing might assuage 
His noble ambition in arms and struggles,
So was he full of leonine courage.
What honor were it to him, though I you told
Of Darius, and a hundred thousand more
Of kings, princes, dukes, earls bold
Whom he conquered, and brought them into woe?
I say, as far as man can ride or walk,
The world was his -- what more should I tell?
For though I should write or told you evermore
About his knighthood, it could not suffice.
Twelve years he reigned, as says Maccabees.
He was the son of Philip of Macedonia,
Who first was king in the country of Greece.
O worthy, noble Alexander, alas,
That ever should befall such a case!
Thou were poisoned by thine own folk;
Fortune has turned thy six [highest throw] into an ace [lowest],
And for thee she wept never a tear.
Who shall give me tears to complain
The death of nobility and of magnanimity,
Who all the world wielded in his control,
And yet it seemed to him it might not suffice?
So full was his disposition of high knightly prowess. 
Alas, who shall me help to indict
False Fortune, and to despise poison,
The which two for all this woe I blame?
By wisdom, manhood, and by great labor,
From humble bed to royal majesty
Up rose this Julius, the conqueror,
That won all the west by land and sea,
By strength of hand, or else by treaty,
And unto Rome made them tributary;
And afterwards of Rome the emperor was he
Until Fortune became his adversary.
O mighty Caesar, that in Thessaly
Against Pompey, thy father in law,
Who of the east had all the dominion by conquest
As far as where the day begins to dawn,
Thou through thy knighthood hast them taken and slain,
Save for a few folk that fled with Pompey,
Through which thou puttest all the east in awe.
Thank Fortune, that so well helped thee to succeed!
But now for a little while I will bewail
This Pompey, this noble governor
Of Rome, who fled at this battle.
I say, one of his men, a false traitor,
His head off smote, to win himself favor
Of Julius, and he brought him the head.
Alas, Pompey, of the east conqueror,
That Fortune unto such an end thee brought!
To Rome again repairs Julius
With his triumphal procession, very nobly crowned with laurel; 
But on a time Brutus Cassius,
Who ever had envy of his high estate,
Full secretly has made conspiracy
Against this Julius in a cunning manner,
And planned the place in which he should die
With daggers, as I shall tell you.
This Julius to the Capitol went
Upon one day, as he was accustomed to go,
And in the Capitol straightway seized him
This false Brutus and his other foes,
And stuck him with daggers straightway
With many a wound, and thus they let him lie;
But never groaned he at no stroke but one,
Or else at two, unless his history lies.
So manly was this Julius of heart,
And so well loved dignified decency,
That though his deadly wounds sorely pained,
His mantle over his hips cast he,
So that no man should see his private parts;
And as he lay a-dying in a trance,
And knew truly that he was dead,
Of decency yet had he remembrance.
Lucan, to thee this history I commend,
And to Suetonius, and to Valerius also,
That of this history wrote beginning and end,
How to these two great conquerors
Fortune was first friend, and afterwards foe.
Let no man trust upon her favor long,
But keep an eye on her for evermore;
Take note of all these conquerors strong.
This rich Croesus, once king of Lydia,
Of which Croesus Cyrus was sorely afraid, 
Yet was he caught amidst all his pride,
And to be burned men led him to the fire.
But such a rain down from the sky poured
That killed the fire, and allowed him to escape;
But to be wary (of Fortune) no grace yet he had,
Until Fortune on the gallows made him gape.
When he had escaped, he can not stop
Beginning a new war again.
He well believed, because Fortune sent him
Such luck that he escaped by means of the rain,
That of his foes he could not be slain;
And also a dream upon one night he dreamed,
Of which he was so proud and also so pleased
That in vengeance he set all his heart.
Upon a tree he was, as it seemed to him,
Where Jupiter washed him, both back and side,
And Phoebus also brought him a fair towel 
To dry himself with; and therefore his pride grew,
And to his daughter, who stood him beside,
Whom he knew to abound in good judgment,
He bad her tell him what it signified,
And she began right thus to expound his dream:
"The tree," said she, "is to signify the gallows,
And Jupiter betokens snow and rain,
And Phoebus, with his towel so clean,
Those are to say the sun beams.
Thou shalt be hanged, father, certainly;
Rain shall thee wash, and sun shall thee dry."
Thus warned him very bluntly and also very plainly
His daughter, who was called Phanye.
Hanged was Cresus, the proud king;
His royal throne could not help him.
Tragedies no other sort of thing
Can in singing cry nor bewail (anything)
But that Fortune always will assail
With unexpected stroke the reigns that are proud;
For when men trust her, then will she fail,
And cover her bright face with a cloud.
There was, as Titus Livius tells,
A knight who was called Virginius,
Filled with honor and with worthiness,
And having powerful friends, and great wealth.
This knight had a daughter by his wife;
No more children had he in all his life.
Fair was this maid in excellent beauty
Above every person that one may see;
For Nature has with her greatest diligence
Formed her in such great excellence,
As though she would say, "Lo! I, Nature,
Thus can I form and paint a creature,
When I wish; who can counterfeit my work?
Not Pygmalion, though he always forge and beat,
Or carve, or paint; for I dare well say
Apelles  or Zeuxis, should work in vain
Either to carve, or paint, or forge, or beat,
If they presumed to imitate me.
For He who is the principal creator
Has appointed me his Chief Deputy,
To form and paint earthly creatures
Right as I wish, and in my control is each thing 
Under the moon, which may grow less or grow larger,
And nothing at all will I ask for my work;
My lord and I are fully in agreement.
I made her to the worship of my lord;
So do I all my other creatures,
Whatever complexion they have or whatever shapes."
It seems to me that Nature would say thus.
This maid was twelve years of age and two,
In whom Nature had such delight.
For just as she can paint a lily white,
And a rose red, just so with such pigments
Has she painted this noble creature,
Before she was born, upon her noble limbs,
Where such colors should rightly be; 
And Phebus has dyed her great tresses
Resembling the rays of his burnished sunbeams.
And if her beauty was excellent,
A thousand times more virtuous was she.
In her there lacked no characteristic
That is to be praised by (one with) sound moral judgement.
As well in spirit as in body chaste was she,
For which she flourished in virginity
With all humility and abstinence,
With all temperance and patience,
With moderation also in demeanor and dress.
She was always discreet in conversation;
Though she was wise as Pallas, I dare say,
Her manner of speaking was also very womanly and plain,
No pretentious terms had she
To seem wise, but in accordance with her rank in life
She spoke, and all her words, long speeches and brief,
In accord with virtue and nobility.
Modest she was in maidenly modesty,
Constant in heart, and ever diligent
To keep herself away from idle sluggishness.
Bacchus had no mastery of her mouth at all;
For wine and youth does increase (the power of) Venus,
As if men would cast oil or grease into a fire.
And of her own moral strength, of her own free choice,
She has very often pretended to be ill,
Because she wanted to flee the company
Where there was likely to be talk of folly,
As is at feasts, revels, and at dances,
That provide opportunities for flirtations.
Such things make children to be
Too soon ripe and bold, as anyone can see,
Which is very perilous and has been since long ago,
For all too soon may she learn the lore
Of boldness, when she is grown to be a wife.
And you mistresses, in your old age,
Who have lords' daughters in governance,
Do not take of my words any displeasure.
Think that you are set in charge 
Of lords' daughters only for two things:
Either because you have kept your chastity,
Or else you have fallen into frailty,
And know very well the tricks of the trade,
And have fully renounced such misconduct
For evermore; therefore, for Christ's sake,
Look that you do not desisit from teaching them virtue.
A thief of venison, who has abandoned
His greedy appetite and all his old craft,
Can guard a forest better than any other man.
Now guard well, for if you want (to do it), you can.
Take good care that you assent unto no vice,
Lest you be damned for your wicked intent;
For whoever does so, is a traitor, certainly.
And pay attention to what I shall say:
Of all betrayals the supreme wickedness
Is when a person betrays innocence.
You fathers and you mothers also as well,
If you have children, be it one or more,
Yours is the responsibility for all their supervision,
While they are under your governance.
Beware, lest by example of your (manner of) living,
Or by your negligence in chastising,
That they should perish; for I dare well say
If they do, you shall dearly pay for it.
Under a soft and negligent shepherd 
The wolf has many a sheep and lamb torn to pieces.
Let one ensample sufficefor the present,
For I must turn again to my subject.
This maiden, of whom I will narrate this tale,
So guarded herself she needed no governess
For in her manner of life maidens might read,
As in a book, every good word or deed
That is proper to a virtuous maiden,
She was so prudent and so filled with good.
For which sprang out all around the fame,
Both of her beauty and her goodness widespread,
So that throughout that land they praised her everyone
Who loved virtue, save Envy alone,
Who is sorry of other men's prosperity
And is glad of his sorrow and his misery.
(The Doctor [St. Augustine] makes this description.)
This maid upon a day went in the town
Toward a temple, with her mother dear,
As is the manner of young maidens.
Now was there then a justice in that town,
Who was governor of that region.
And it so happened that this judge cast his eyes 
Upon this maid, considering her very intently,
As she passed by where this judge stood.
Immediately his heart changed and his mood,
So was he caught by the beauty of this maid,
And to himself very secretly he said,
"This maid shall be mine, despite what any man (may do)!"
Immediately. the fiend ran into his heart,
And taught him suddenly that he by trickery 
Could win the maiden to his purpose.
For certainly, not by any force nor by any bribery,
He thought, would he be able to succeed;
For she had powerful friends, and also she
Was confirmed in such supreme goodness
That he knew well he could never win her 
And make her sin with her body.
For which, after great deliberation,
He sent for a churl, who was in the town,
Whom he knew for trickery and for boldness.
This judge unto this churl his tale has told
Secretly, and made him swear 
He should tell it to no creature,
And if he did, he should lose his head.
When this cursed plot was agreed upon
Glad was this judge, and made much of him (the churl),
And gave him precious and expensive gifts.
When all their conspiracy was planned
In great detail, how his lechery
Should be accomplished very subtly,
As you shall later hear it clearly,
Home goes the churl, who is called Claudius.
This false judge, who is called Apius,
(Such was his name, for this is no fable,
But known for a noteworthy historical fact;
The substance of it is true, beyond doubt),
This false judge goes now fast about
Hastening his delight all that he can.
And so it happened soon after, on a certain day,
This false judge, as the story tells us,
As he was accustomed, sat in his court,
And gave his judgements upon various cases.
This false churl came forth at a very rapid pace,
And said, "Lord, if it be your will,
Do me justice concerning this piteous formal complaint,
In which I complain about Virginius;
And if he will say it is not thus,
I will prove it, and find good evidence,
That what my formal complaint will express is truth."
The judge answered, "Of this, in his absence,
I can not give definitive judgment.
Let him be called, and I will gladly hear (the case);
Thou shalt have all justice, and no wrong here."
Virginius came to learn the judge's will,
And right away this cursed complaint was read;
The substance of it was as you shall hear:
"To you, my lord, Sir Apius so dear,
Your poor servant Claudius shows
How a knight, called Virginius,
Against the law, against all equity,
Expressly against my will, holds 
My servant, who is my slave by right,
Who was stolen from my house upon one night,
While she was very young; this will I prove
By evidence, lord, providing that you be not displeased.
She is not his daughter, whatever he may say.
Therefore to you, my lord judge, I pray,
Yield me my slave, if it be your will."
Lo, this was all the substance of his complaint.
Virginius began to look upon the churl,
Hastily, before he finished telling his tale,
And would have proven it as a knight should (by battle),
And also by the evidence of many a person,
That all that his adversary said was false,
This cursed judge would not at all delay,
Nor hear one word more from Virginius,
But gave his judgment, and said thus:
"I decide that this churl should have his slave right now;
Thou shalt no longer keep her in thine house.
Go bring her forth, and put her in our guardianship.
The churl shall have his slave, this I decree."
And when this worthy knight Virginius
Because of the verdict of this justice Apius
By force had to give his dear daughter
Unto the judge, to live in lechery,
He goes home, and sat himself in his hall,
And immediately had his dear daughter called,
And with a face as dead as cold ashes 
Upon her humble face he did behold,
With a father's pity stabbing through his heart,
Although he would not deviate from his purpose.
"Daughter," said he, "Virginia, by thy name,
There are two ways, either death or shame,
That thou most suffer; alas, that I was born!
For never thou deservedest for whatever reason
To die by a sword or by a knife.
O dear daughter, ender of my life,
Whom I have nurured with such pleasure
That thou were never out of my thoughts!
O daughter, who art my greatest woe,
And in my life my greatest joy also,
O gem of chastity, in patience
Take thou thy death, for this is my decision.
For love, and not for hate, thou must be dead;
My piteous hand must smite off thy head.
Alas, that ever Apius saw thee!
For that reason he has falsely judged thee to-day" --
And told her the whole business, as you before
Have heard; there is no need to tell it again.
"O mercy, dear father!" said this maid,
And with that word she both her arms laid
About his neck, as she was accustomed to do.
The tears burst out of her two eyes,
And said, "Good father, must I dye?
Is there no grace, is there no remedy?"
"No, certainly, dear daughter mine," said he.
"Then give me time, father mine," said she,
"To lament my death for a little while;
For, truly, Jeptha gave his daughter grace
To lament, before he slew her, alas!
And, God knows it,  her trespass was nothing,
Except that she ran first to see her father,
To welcome him with great solemnity."
And with that word immediately she fell in a swoon,
And afterwards, when her swooning is gone,
She rises up, and to her father said,
"Blessed be God that I shall die a maid!
Give me my death, before I have dishonor;
Do with your child your will, in God's name!"
And with that word she prayed him repeatedly
That with his sword he would smite gently;
And with that word down she fell in a swoon.
Her father, with very sorrowful heart and will,
Struck off her head, and by the hair siezed it,
And he did present it to the judge,
As he sat yet rendering judgements in court.
And when the judge saw it, as says the story,
He ordered [his men] to take him and hang him at once;
But right away a thousand people burst in,
To save the knight, for compassion and for pity,
For the false wickedness was known.
The people immediately suspected in this matter,
Because of the manner of the churl's claim,
That it was by the conspiring of Apius;
They knew well that he was lecherous.
For which unto this Apius they go
And cast him in a prison straightway,
Where he slew himself; and Claudius,
Who was servant unto this Apius,
Was condemned to hang upon a tree,
Except that Virginius, of his pity,
So prayed for him (Claudius) that he was exiled;
And also, certainly, he had been tricked (by Apius).
The remnant were hanged, high ranking and low,
Who were accessories to this crime.
Here may men see how sin has its reward.
Beware, for no man knows whom God will smite
In any rank, nor in what sort of way;
The worm of conscience may tremble for fear
Because of a wicked life, though it so secret be
That no man knows about it but God and he.
For be he ignorant man, or else learned,
He knows not how soon he shall be terrified.
Therefore I advise you to take this counsel:
Abandon sin, before sin abandons you.
When Arcite was come to Thebes,
Very often each day he grew faint and said "Alas!"
For he shall never more see his lady.
And shortly to conclude (telling) all his woe,
So much sorrow never had creature
That is, or shall (be), while the world may endure.
He is bereft of his sleep, his food, his drink
So that he became lean and dry as is a stick;
His eyes sunken and grisly to behold,
His hue sickly yellow and pale as cold ashes,
And he was solitary and ever alone,
And wailing all the night, making his moan;
And if he heard song or instrument,
Then would he weep, he could not be stopped.
So feeble also were his spirits, and so low,
And changed so, that no man could know
His speech nor his voice, though men heard it.
And in his behavior for all the world he fared
Not only like the lover's malady
Of Hereos, but rather like mania,
Engendered by the melancholic humor 
In the front lobe, in his imagination.
And shortly, all was turned topsy-turvy
Both the physical condition and also the mental disposition
Of him, this woeful lover dan Arcite.
Why should I all daylong write of his woe?
When he had endured a year or two
This cruel torment and this pain and woe,
At Thebes, in his country, as I said,
Upon one night as he laid himself in sleep,
It seemed to him that the winged god Mercury
Stood before him and commanded him to be merry.
His sleep-inducing staff he carried upright in his hand;
He wore a hat upon his bright hair.
This god was dressed, as he (Arcite) noticed,
As he was when he put Argus to sleep;
And said to him thus: "To Athens shalt thou go,
Where an end of thy woe is destined for thee."
And with that word Arcite awoke and leaped up.
"Now truly, however sorely it may pain me,"
Said he, "I will go to Athens right now,
Nor shall I refrain for the dread of death 
From seeing my lady, whom I love and serve.
In her presence I care not if I die."
And with that word he picked up a large mirror,
And saw that all his color was changed,
And saw his visage all (changed) to another sort.
And right away it ran to him in his mind,
That, since his face was so disfigured
By the malady which he had endured,
He might well, if he conducted himself humbly,
Live in Athens evermore unknown,
And see his lady almost every day.
And right away he changed his clothing,
And clad himself as a poor laborer,
And all alone, except only a squire
Who knew his private affairs and all his situation,
Who was disguised as poorly as he was,
To Athens he is gone the nearest way.
And to the court he went upon a day,
And at the gate he offers his service
To drudge and draw water, whatever men will command.
And shortly to speak of this matter,
He was given employment by a household attendant
Who was dwelling with Emelye,
For he was wise and could soon take the measure
Of every servant, who serves here.
He could well hew wood, and carry water,
For he was young and mighty indeed,
And moreover he was tall and strong of bones
To do what any one can command him.
A year or two he was in this service,
Page of the chamber of Emelye the bright,
And he said that he was called Philostrate.
But half so well beloved a man as he
Was never in court (anyone) of his rank;
He was so noble in manner
That his fame was (spread) throughout all the court .
They said that it would be a act of charity
If Theseus would advance his rank,
And put him in noble employment,
Where he could exercise his abilities.
And thus within a short time his fame is sprung,
Both for his deeds and his good speech,
That Theseus has taken him so near
That he has made him a squire of his chamber,
And gave him gold to maintain (a life style suitable to) his rank.
And also men brought him out of his country,
From year to year, very secretly, his income;
But properly and slyly he spent it,
So that no man wondered how he acquired it.
And three years in this manner he led his life,
And conducted himself so that, in peace and also in war,
There was no man whom Theseus holds dearer.
And in this bliss I now leave Arcite,
And I will speak of Palamon a little.
In darkness and horrible and strong imprisonment
These seven years Palamon has sat 
Wasted by suffering, what for woe and for distress.
Who feels double pain and sadness
But Palamon, whom love so afflicts
That he goes mad, out of his wits because of woe?
And also moreover he is a prisoner
Perpetually, not just for a year.
Who could rime in English properly
His martyrdom? In truth it is not I;
Therefore I pass on as quickly as I can.
It happened that in the seventh year, of May
The third night (as old books say,
That tell all this story more fully),
Whether it was by chance or fate --
As, when a thing is pre-ordained, it must be --
That soon after midnight Palamon,
With the help of a friend, broke out of his prison
And flees the city as fast as he can go.
For he had so given his jailer drink 
Of a spiced and sweetened drink made of a certain wine,
With narcotics and pure opium of Thebes,
That all that night, though men would shake him,
The jailer slept; he could not awake.
And thus he flees as fast as ever he can.
The night was short and very close to the day
So that by necessity he must hide himself,
And to a grove close by 
With fearful foot then stalks Palamon.
For, shortly, this was his idea:
That in that grove he would hide himself all day,
And in the night then he would take his way
Toward Thebes, to pray his friends 
To help him to wage war on Theseus;
And shortly, he would either lose his life
Or win Emelye to be his wife.
This is the purpose and his full intent.
Now I will turn again to Arcite,
That little knew how near his trouble was,
To which Fortune had brought him in the snare.
The busy lark, messenger of day,
Salutes the morning gray in her song,
And fiery Phoebus rises up so bright
That all the orient laughs because of the light,
And with his rays dries in the groves
The silver drops hanging on the leaves.
And Arcite, who in the royal court
With Theseus is chief squire,
Is risen and looks on the merry day.
And to do his observance to May,
Meditating on the object of his desire,
He on a war horse, leaping about like the fire,
Has ridden into the fields to amuse himself,
Out of the court, about a mile or two.
And to the grove of which I told you 
By chance he began to hold his way 
To make himself a garland of the branches,
Were it of woodbine or hawthorn leaves,
And loud he sang in the bright sun:
"May, with all thy flowers and thy greenery,
Welcome be thou, fair, fresh May,
In hope that I can get something green."
And from his war horse, with an eager heart,
He rushed into the grove hastily,
And in a path he roams up and down,
Where by chance this Palamon
Was in a thicket, so that no man could see him,
For he was sorely afraid of his death.
In no way did he know that it was Arcite;
God knows he would scarcely have believed it
But truly it is said, since many years ago,
That "field has eyes and the wood has ears."
It is very good for a man to act calmly,
For every day people meet at unexpected times.
Arcite knows full little of his fellow,
Who was near enough to hear all his speech,
For in the thicket he sits now very still.
When Arcite had roamed all his fill,
And sung all the rondel cheerfully,
He fell suddenly into a state of anxiety,
As these lovers do in their strange manners,
Now in the tree top, now down in the briars,
Now up, now down, like a bucket in a well.
Exactly like the Friday, truly for to tell,
Now it shines, now it rains hard,
Just so can fickle Venus sadden
The hearts of her folk; just as her day
Is changeable, just so she changes her array.
Friday is seldom like all the rest of the week.
When Arcite had sung, he began to sigh
And sat himself down without any more.
"Alas," he said, "that day that I was born!
How long, Juno, through thy cruelty,
Wilt thou make war on the city of Thebes?
Alas, to ruin is brought
The royal blood of Cadmus and Amphion --
Of Cadmus, who was the first man
Who built Thebes, before the town first began,
And first was crowned king of the city.
I am of his lineage and his offspring
By true lineage, of the royal family,
And now I am so wretched and so enslaved,
That he who is my mortal enemy,
I meekly serve him as his squire.
And yet Juno does me much more shame,
For I dare not acknowledge my own name;
But whereas I was accustomed to be called Arcite,
Now I am called Philostrate, not worth a penny.
Alas, thou fierce Mars! Alas, Juno!
Thus has your anger destroyed all our lineage,
Save only me and wretched Palamon,
Whom Theseus torments in prison.
And in addition to all this, to slay me utterly
Love has his fiery dart so ardently
Stabbed through my faithful, sorrowful heart
That my death was destined before my first garment was made.
You slay me with your eyes, Emelye!
You are the cause by which I die.
Of all the rest of my other troubles
I do not reckon at the value of a weed,
Provided that I could do anything to please you."
And with that word he fell down in a trance
A long time, and afterwards he leaped up.
This Palamon, that thought that through his heart
He felt a cold sword suddenly glide,
For anger he trembled; no longer would he wait.
And when he had heard Arcite's tale,
As if he were mad, with face dead and pale,
He leaped up out of the thick bushes 
And said: "Arcite, false, wicked traitor,
Now art thou taken, who lovest my lady so,
For whom that I have all this pain and woe,
And art of my blood, and sworn to be in my confidence,
As I full often have told thee before now,
And hast tricked here duke Theseus,
And thus hast falsely changed thy name!
I will be dead, or else thou shalt die.
Thou shalt not love my lady Emelye,
But I will love her only and no other;
For I am Palamon, thy mortal foe.
And though I have no weapon in this place,
But out of prison am escaped by good luck,
I doubt not that either thou shalt dye,
Either thou shalt not love Emelye,
Choose which thou wish, or thou shalt not escape!"
This Arcite, with full spiteful heart,
When he knew him, and had heard his tale,
As fierce as a lion pulled out his sword,
And said thus: "By God who sits above,
Were it not that thou art sick and mad for love,
And also because thou hast no weapon in this place,
Thou shouldest never walk out of this grove,
Rather thou shouldest die of my hand. 
For I repudiate the pledge and the bond
Which thou sayest that I have made to thee.
Lo! True fool, think well that love is free,
And I will love her in spite of all thy might!
But for as much as thou art a worthy knight
And desire to decide the right to her by battle,
Have here my pledge; tomorrow I will not fail,
Without the knowledge of any other person,
But here I will be found as a knight,
And bring armor right enough for thee;
And choose the best, and leave the worst for me.
And food and drink this night will I bring
Enough for thee, and bed-clothes for thy bedding.
And if it so be that thou win my lady,
And slay me in this wood where I am in,
Thou mayest well have thy lady as far as I am concerned."
This Palamon answered, "I agree."
And thus they are departed until morning,
When each of them had laid his faith as a pledge.
O Cupid, devoid of all kindness to others!
O reign, that will have no partner with thee!
Full truly it is said that love nor lordship
Will not, willingly, have any partnership.
Arcite and Palamon well find that (to be true).
Arcite has ridden immediately into the town,
And on the morning, before it was day's light,
Very secretly he has prepared two sets of armor,
Both sufficient and suitable to decide
The battle in the field between them two;
And on his horse, alone as he was born,
He carries all the armor before him.
And in the grove, at time and place set,
This Arcite and this Palamon are met.
The color in their faces began to change;
Just as the hunters in the reign of Thrace,
He who stands at the gap in the forrest with a spear,
When the lion or the bear is hunted,
And hears him come rushing in the bushes,
And breaks both boughs and the leaves,
And thinks, "Here comes my mortal enemy!
Without fail, he must be dead, or I,
For either I must slay him at the gap,
Or he must slay me, if I suffer misfortune."
So fared they in changing colors of their faces,
When each of them knew the other.
There was no 'good day,' nor no salutations,
But straightway, without word or conversing,
Each one of them helped to arm the other
As friendly as if he were his own brother;
And after that, with sharp strong spears 
They thrust at each other a wonderfully long time.
Thou mightest suppose that this Palamon
In his fighting was a mad lion,
And Arcite was like a cruel tiger;
They began to smite like wild boars,
That froth at the mouth white as foam for mad anger. 
They fought up to the ankle in their blood.
And in this manner I leave them to remain fighting,
And forth I will tell you of Theseus.
The destiny, general minister,
That executes in the world everywhere
The providence that God has foreseen,
So strong it is that, though the world had sworn
The contrary of a thing by yes or no,
Yet sometimes it shall happen on one day
That happens not again in a thousand years. 
For certainly, our desires here,
Be it of war, or peace, or hate, or love,
All this is ruled by the foresight above.
I mean this now in regard to mighty Theseus,
Who is so desirous to hunt,
And especially at the large hart in May,
That in his bed there dawns for him no day
That he is not clad, and ready to ride
With huntsman and horn and hounds beside him.
For in his hunting he has such delight
That it is all his joy and desire
To be himself the large hart's slayer,
For next to Mars he now serves Diana.
The day was clear, as I have told before this,
And Theseus with all joy and bliss,
With his Ypolita, the faire queen,
And Emelye, clothed all in green,
On hunting they are ridden royally.
And to the grove that stood very close by,
In which there was a hart, so people told him,
Duke Theseus has held the straight way.
And directly to the glade he rides,
For through there the hart was accustomed to take his escape,
And (flee) over a brook, and so forth on his way.
This duke will have a run or two at him
With such hounds as he pleases to command.
And when this duke was come unto the glade,
He looks toward the sun, and immediately
He was aware of Arcite and Palamon,
Who fought as fiercely as if it were two wild boars.
The bright swords went to and fro
So hideously that with the weakest stroke
It seemed as if it would fell an oak.
But who they were, he knew nothing.
This duke smote his warhorse with his spurs,
And with a sudden leap he was between them two,
And pulled out a sword and cried, "Stop!
No more, on the penalty of the loss of your head!
By mighty Mars, he shall at once be dead
Who smites any stroke that I can see.
But tell me what sort of men you are,
Who are so bold as to fight here
Without judge or other officer,
As it would be in a properly conducted duel,"
This Palamon answered hastily
And said, "Sire, what more words are needed?
We have deserved the death, both of us two.
Two woeful wretches are we, two miserable people,
Who are burdened down by our own lives;
And as thou art a rightful lord and judge,
Give us neither mercy nor refuge,
But slay me first, by holy charity!
But slay my fellow also as well as me;
Or slay him first, for though thou little knowest it,
This is thy mortal foe, this is Arcite,
Who is banished from thy land on (pain of losing) his head,
For which he has deserved to be dead.
For this is he that came unto thy gate
And said that he was called  Philostrate.
Thus has he tricked thee for many years,
And thou hast made him thy chief squire;
And this is he that loves Emelye.
For since the day is come that I must dye,
I make plainly my confession
That I am that same woeful Palamon
That wickedly has broken (out of) thy prison.
I am thy mortal foe, and it is I
Who loves the beautiful Emelye so passionately 
That I will die at this moment in her sight.
Therefore I ask death and my judicial sentence;
But slay my fellow in the same way,
For we have both deserved to be slain."
This worthy duke answered at once in reply,
And said, "This is a brief (easy) decision. 
Your own mouth, by your confession,
Has condemned you, and I will pronounce it;
There is no deed to torture you with the cord.
You shall be dead, by mighty Mars the red!"
The queen at once, for true womanliness,
Began to weep, and so did Emelye,
And all the ladies in the company.
Great pity was it, as it seemed to them all,
That ever such a misfortune should occur,
For they were gentle men of high rank,
And this debate was for nothing but love;
And saw their bloody wounds wide and sore,
And all cried, both low ranking and high,
"Have mercy, Lord, upon all of us women!"
And they fall down on their bare knees 
And would have kissed his feet there where he stood;
Until at the last his mood was calmed,
For pity comes soon to a gentle heart.
And though he first for anger shook and trembled,
He has considered shortly, in brief,
The trespass of them both, and also the cause,
And although his anger reproached them for their guilt,
Yet in his reason he excused them both,
As thus: he thought well that every man
Will help himself in love, if he can,
And also deliver himself out of prison.
And also his heart had compassion
Of women, for they weep continually,
And in his gentle heart he thought straightway,
And softly to himself he said, "Fie
Upon a lord that will have no mercy,
But be a lion, both in word and deed,
To those who are in repentance and fear,
As well as to a proud, spiteful man
Who will persist in what he first began.
That lord has little sound judgment,
That in such cases knows no distinctions
But considers pride and humility equal."
And shortly, when his anger is thus gone,
He began to look up with bright eyes 
And spoke these same words all aloud:
"The god of love, ah, bless my soul!
How mighty and how great a lord is he!
Against his power there avail no obstacles.
He may be called a god for his miracles,
For he can make, as he pleases,
Of every heart whatever he wants to devise.
Lo here this Arcite and this Palamon,
Who freely were out of my prison,
And could have lived royally in Thebes,
And know I am their mortal enemy,
And that their death lies in my power also,
And yet has Love, despite anything they could do,
Brought them both hither to die.
Now look, is that not a great folly?
Who can be a fool unless he is in love?
Behold, for the sake of God who sits above,
See how they bleed! Are they not in fine condition?
Thus has their lord, the god of love, paid
Their wages and their fees for their service!
And yet they consider themselves very wise,
Those who serve love, whatever may happen.
But this is yet the best joke of all,
That she for whom they have this sport
Owes them as much gratitude for this as she owes me.
She knows no more of all this passionate business,
By God, than knows a cuckoo or a hare!
But all must be tried, hot or cold; 
A man must be a fool, either young or old --
I know it by my own experience very long ago,
For in my time I was a servant (of love).
And therefore, since I know of love's pain
And know how sorely it can afflict a man,
As one who has been often caught in its snare,
I wholly forgive you this trespass,
At the request of the queen, who kneels here,
And also of Emelye, my dear sister.
And you must both immediately swear unto me 
That you shall never more harm my country,
Nor make war upon me at any time,
But be my friends in all that you can.
I forgive you this trespass completely."
And they fairly and well swore to him (to do) his request,
And prayed him to be their lord and to have mercy ,
And he grants them his favor, and thus he said:
"To speak of royal lineage and riches,
Though she were a queen or a princess,
Each of you both is worthy, doubtless,
To wed when it is time; but none the less --
I speak for my sister Emelye,
For whom you have this strife and jealousy --
You know yourself she can not wed two
At once, though you were to fight for evermore,
That one of you, whether he likes it or not, 
He must go whistle in an ivy leaf;
This is to say, she can not now have both,
Although you be never so jealous nor so angry.
And therefore I put you in this situation,
That each of you shall have his destiny
As is ordained for him, and listen in what way;
Lo, hear what I shall arrange for your fate.
My will is this, for flat conclusion,
Without any arguing --
If this pleases you, take it for the best:
That each one of you shall go where he pleases
Freely, without ransom or resistance,
And fifty weeks from this day, more or less,
Each one of you shall bring a hundred knights
Armed up for the lists in all respects,
All ready to decide the right to her by battle.
And this I promise you without fail,
Upon my word, and as I am a knight,
That whichever of you both who has the power --
This is to say, that whether he or thou
Can with his hundred, as I spoke of now,
Slay his opponent, or drive him out of the lists ,
Then I shall give Emelye as wife
To whom Fortune gives so good a gift (to win the battle).
I shall make the lists in this place,
And as God may surely have pity on my soul
I shall be an impartial and true judge.
You shall make no other agreement with me,
(Save this:) that one of you must be dead or taken.
And if it seems to you that this is well said,
Say your opinion, and consider yourself satisfied.
This is your (destined) end and your conclusion."
Who but Palamon looks happy now?
Who springs up for joy but Arcite?
Who could tell, or who could describe in writing,
The joy that is made in the place
When Theseus has behaved so graciously?
But down on knees went every sort of person,
And thanked him with all their heart and might,
And especially the Thebans many times.
And thus with good hope and with happy heart
They take their leave, and homeward did they ride
To Thebes with his old wide walls.
"Experience, though no written authority
Were in this world, is good enough for me
To speak of the woe that is in marriage;
For, gentlemen, since I was twelve years of age,
Thanked be God who is eternally alive,
I have had five husbands at the church door --
If I so often might have been wedded --
And all were worthy men in their way.
But to me it was told, certainly, it is not long ago,
That since Christ went never but once
To a wedding, in the Cana of Galilee,
That by that same example he taught me
That I should be wedded but once.
Listen also, lo, what a sharp word for this purpose,
Beside a well, Jesus, God and man,
Spoke in reproof of the Samaritan:
`Thou hast had five husbands,' he said,
`And that same man that now has thee
Is not thy husband,' thus he said certainly.
What he meant by this, I can not say;
But I ask, why the fifth man
Was no husband to the Samaritan?
How many might she have in marriage?
I never yet heard tell in my lifetime
A definition of this number.
Men may conjecture and interpret in every way,
But well I know, expressly, without lie,
God commanded us to grow fruitful and multiply;
That gentle text I can well understand.
Also I know well, he said my husband
Should leave father and mother and take to me.
But he made no mention of number,
Of marrying two, or of marrying eight;
Why should men then speak evil of it?
Lo, (consider) here the wise king, dan Salomon;
I believe he had wives more than one.
As would God it were lawful unto me
To be refreshed half so often as he!
What a gift of God he had because of all his wives!
No man that in this world is alive has such (a gift).
God knows, this noble king, according to my judgment,
The first night had many a merry fit
With each of them, so well things went for him in his lifetime.
Blessed be God that I have wedded five!
[Of which I have picked out the best,
Both of their lower purse (scrotum) and of their strongbox.
Differing schools make perfect clerks,
And differing practice in many various works
Makes the workman truly perfect;
Of five husbands' schooling am I.]
Welcome the sixth, whenever he shall appear.
For truly, I will not keep myself chaste in everything.
When my husband is gone from the world,
Some Christian man shall wed me straightway,
For then the apostle says that I am free
To wed, by God's side (I swear), wherever it pleases me.
He says that to be wedded is no sin;
It is better to be wedded than to burn.
What do I care, though folk speak evil
Of cursed Lamech and his bigamy?
I know well Abraham was a holy man,
And Jacob also, insofar as I know;
And each of them had more than two wives,
And many another holy man also.
Where can you find, in any historical period,
That high God forbad marriage
By express word? I pray you, tell me.
Or where commanded he virginity?
I know as well as you, it is no doubt,
The apostle, when he speaks of maidenhood,
He said that he had no precept concerning it.
Men may advise a woman to be one,
But advice is no commandment.
He left it to our own judgment;
For had God commanded maidenhood,
Then had he damned marriage along with the act (of procreation).
And certainly, if there were no seed sown,
Then from what should virginity grow?
In any case, Paul dared not command
A thing of which his master gave no command.
The prize is set up for virginity;
Catch it whoever can, let's see who runs best.
But this word does not apply to every person,
But where God desires to give it by his power.
I know well that the apostle was a virgin;
But nonetheless, though he wrote and said
He would that every person were such as he,
All is nothing but advice to (adopt) virginity. 
And he gave me leave to be a wife 
By explicit permission; so it is not blameful
To wed me, if my mate should die,
Without objection on the grounds of bigamy.
Although it would be good to touch no woman --
He meant in his bed or in his couch,
For it is perilous to assemble both fire and flax;
You know what this example may apply to.
This is the sum of it: he held virginity
More perfect than wedding in weakness.
Weakness I call it, unless he and she
Would lead all their life in chastity.
I grant it well; I have no envy,
Though maidenhood may have precedence over a second marriage.
It pleases them to be clean, body and spirit;
Of my state I will make no boast,
For well you know, a lord in his household,
He has not every utensil all of gold;
Some are of wood, and do their lord service.
God calls folk to him in various ways,
And each one has of God an individual gift --
Some this, some that, as it pleases Him to provide.
Virginity is great perfection,
And continence also with devotion,
But Christ, who is the source of perfection,
Did not command that every one should go sell
All that he had, and give it to the poor,
And in such wise follow him and his footsteps.
He spoke to those who would live perfectly;
And gentlemen, by your leave, I am not that.
I will bestow the flower of all my age
In the acts and in fruit of marriage.
Tell me also, to what purpose
Were members of generation made,
And by so perfectly wise a Workman wrought?
Trust right well, they were not made for nothing.
Interpret whoever will, and say both up and down
That they were made for purgation
Of urine, and both our small things 
Were also to know a female from a male,
And for no other cause -- do you say no?
The experience knows well it is not so.
Provided that the clerks be not angry with me,
I say this: that they are made for both;
That is to say, for urination and for ease
Of procreation, in which we do not displease God.
Why else should men set in their books 
That man shall pay to his wife her debt?
Now with what should he make his payment,
If he did not use his blessed instrument? 
Then were they made upon a creature
To purge urine, and also for procreation.
But I say not that every person is required,
That has such equipment as I to you told,
To go and use them in procreation.
Then should men have no regard for chastity.
Christ was a virgin and shaped like a man,
And many a saint, since the world began;
Yet lived they ever in perfect chastity.
I will envy no virginity.
Let them be bread of pure wheat-seed,
And let us wives be called barley-bread;
And yet with barley-bread, Mark can tell it,
Our Lord Jesus refreshed many a man.
In such estate as God has called us
I will persevere; I am not fussy.
In wifehood I will use my instrument
As freely as my Maker has it sent.
If I be niggardly, God give me sorrow!
My husband shall have it both evenings and mornings,
When it pleases him to come forth and pay his debt.
A husband I will have -- I will not desist --
Who shall be both my debtor and my slave,
And have his suffering also 
Upon his flesh, while I am his wife.
I have the power during all my life
Over his own body, and not he.
Right thus the Apostle told it unto me,
And commanded our husbands to love us well.
All this sentence pleases me every bit" --
Up sprang the Pardoner, and that at once;
"Now, madam," he said, "by God and by Saint John!
You are a noble preacher in this case.
I was about to wed a wife; alas!
Why should I pay for it so dearly on my flesh?
Yet would I rather wed no wife this year!"
"Wait!" she said, "my tale is not begun.
Nay, thou shalt drink from another barrel,
Before I go, which shall taste worse than ale.
And when I have told thee forth my tale
Of suffering in marriage, 
Of which I am expert in all my life -- 
This is to say, myself have been the whip --
Than may thou choose whether thou will sip
Of that same barrel that I shall open.
Beware of it, before thou too near approach;
For I shall tell examples more than ten.
`Whoever will not be warned by (the examples of) other men,
Shall be an example by which other men shall be corrected.'
The same words writes Ptholomy;
Read in his Almagest, and take it there."
"Madam, I would pray you, if it were your will,"
Said this Pardoner, "as you began,
Tell forth your tale, refrain for no man,
And teach us young men of your practice."
"Gladly," she said, "since it may please you;
But yet I pray to all this company,
If I speak according to my fancy,
Do not be annoyed by what I say,
For my intention is only to amuse.
Now, sir, now will I tell forth my tale.
As ever may I drink wine or ale,
I shall speak the truth; those husbands that I had,
Three of them were good, and two were bad.
The three were good men, and rich, and old;
Hardly might they the statute hold (pay the debt)
In which they were bound unto me.
You know well what I mean of this, by God!
So help me God, I laugh when I think
How pitifully at night I made them work!
And, by my faith, I set no store by it.
They had given me their land and their treasure;
I needed not work hard any longer
To win their love, or do them reverence.
They loved me so well, by God above,
That I reckoned little of their love!
A wise woman will be constantly busy
To get their love, yes, when she has none.
But since I had them wholly in my hand,
And since they had me given all their land,
Why should I take care to please them,
Unless it were for my profit and my pleasure?
I set them so to work, by my faith,
That many a night they sang `Woe is me!'
The bacon was not fetched for them, I believe,
That some men have in Essex at Dunmowe.
I governed them so well, according to my law,
That each of them was very blissful and eager
To bring me gay things from the fair.
They were very glad when I spoke to them pleasantly,
For, God knows it, I cruelly scolded them.
Now listen how well I conducted myself,
You wise wives, that can understand.
Thus should you speak and accuse them wrongfully,
For half so boldly can there no man
Swear and lie, as a woman can.
I do not say this concerning wives that are wise,
Unless it be when they are ill advised.
A wise wife, if she knows what is good for her,
Shall deceive him by swearing the bird is crazy, 
And prove it by taking witness of her own maid 
Who is in league with her. But listen how I spoke: 
`Sir old doddering fool, is this thy doing? 
Why is my neighbor's wife so gay?
She is honored everywhere she goes;
I sit at home; I have no decent clothing.
What dost thou at my neighbor's house?
Is she so fair? Art thou so amorous?
What do you whisper with our maid? Bless me!
Sir old lecher, let thy tricks be! 
And if I have a close friend or an acquaintance,
Innocently, thou scold like a fiend,
If I walk or go unto his house to amuse myself!
Thou comest home as drunk as a mouse,
And preach on thy bench, bad luck to you!
Thou sayest to me it is a great misfortune
To wed a poor woman, because of expense;
And if she be rich, of high birth,
Then thou sayest that it is a torment
To put up with her pride and her angry moods.
And if she be fair, thou utter knave,
Thou sayest that every lecher wants to have her;
She can not remain chaste for any length of time, 
Who is assailed on every side.
Thou sayest some folk desire us for riches,
Some for our shape, and some for our fairness,
And one because she can either sing or dance,
And some because of noble descent and flirtatious talk;
Some because of their hands and their slender arms;
Thus goes all to the devil, according to you.
Thou sayest men may not defend a castle wall,
It may so long be assailed on all sides.
And if she be ugly, thou sayest that she
Covets every man that she may see,
For like a spaniel she will on him leap,
Until she find some man to buy (take) her.
Nor does any goose go there in the lake, no matter how drab,
That, thou sayest, will be without a mate.
And thou sayest it is a hard thing to control
A thing that no man will, willingly, hold.
Thus sayest thou, scoundrel, when thou goest to bed,
And that no wise man needs to wed,
Nor any man that hopes (to go) to heaven.
With wild thunder-bolt and fiery lightning
May thy wrinkled neck be broken in pieces!
Thou sayest that leaky houses, and also smoke,
And scolding wives make men to flee
Out of their own houses; ah, bless me!
What ails such an old man to chide like that?
Thou sayest we wives will hide our vices 
Until we be securely tied (in marriage), and then we will them show --
Well may that be a proverb of a scoundrel!
Thou sayest that oxen, asses, horses, and hounds,
They are tried out a number of times;
Basins, wash bowls, before men them buy,
Spoons and stools, and all such household items,
And so are pots, clothes, and adornments;
But folk of wives make no trial,
Until they are wedded -- old doddering scoundrel! --
And then, sayest thou, we will show our vices.
Thou sayest also that it displeases me
Unless thou will praise my beauty,
And unless thou peer always upon my face,
And call me "dear lady" in every place.
And unless thou make a feast on that same day
That I was born, and make me happy and gay;
And unless thou do honor to my nurse,
And to my chambermaid within my bedchamber,
And to my father's folk and his allies --
Thus sayest thou, old barrelful of lies!
And yet of our apprentice Janekin,
Because of his curly hair, shining like gold so fine,
And because he familiarly attends me everywhere,
Yet hast thou caught a false suspicion.
I do not want him, though thou were dead tomorrow!
But tell me this: why hidest thou, bad luck to you,
The keys of thy strongbox away from me?
It is my property as well as thine, by God!
What, think thou to make a fool of the lady of the house?
Now by that lord that is called Saint James,
Thou shalt not both, though thou were crazy with anger,
Be master of my body and of my property;
One of them thou must give up, despite anything you can do.
What helps it to inquire about me or spy?
I believe thou would lock me in thy strongbox!
Thou should say, "Wife, go where you please;
Enjoy yourself; I will not believe any gossip.
I know you for a true wife, dame Alys."
We love no man who takes notice or concern about
Where we go; we will be free (to do as we wish).
Of all men blessed may he be,
The wise astrologer, Dan Ptolemy,
Who says this proverb in his Almagest:
"Of all men his wisdom is the highest
Who never cares who has the world in his control."
By this proverb thou shalt understand,
If thou have enough, why should thou take note or care
How merrily other folks fare?
For, certainly, old senile fool, by your leave,
You shall have pudendum right enough at eve. 
He is too great a miser that would refuse
A man to light a candle at his lantern;
He shall have never the less light, by God.
If thou have enough, thou need not complain.
Thou sayest also, that if we make ourselves gay
With clothing, and with precious adornments,
That it is dangerous to our chastity;
And yet -- bad luck to thee! -- thou must reinforce thy argument,
And say these words in the Apostle's name:
"In clothing made with chastity and shame
You women shall apparel yourselves," he said,
"And not in carefully arranged hair and gay precious stones,
Such as pearls, nor with gold, nor rich cloth."
In accordance with thy text, nor in accord with thy interpretation,
I will not do as much as a gnat.
Thou said this, that I was like a cat;
For if anyone would singe a cat's skin,
Then would the cat well stay in his dwelling;
And if the cat's skin be sleek and gay,
She will not stay in house half a day,
But forth she will (go), before any day be dawned,
To show her skin and go yowling like a cat in heat. 
This is to say, if I be well dressed, sir scoundrel,
I will run out to show my poor clothes.
Sir old fool, what help is it for thee to spy?
Though thou pray Argus with his hundred eyes
To be my bodyguard, as he best knows how,
In faith, he shall not keep me but as I please;
Yet could I deceive him, as I may prosper!
Thou said also that there are three things,
The which things trouble all this earth,
And that no one can endure the fourth.
O dear sir scoundrel, Jesus shorten thy life!
Yet thou preachest and sayest a hateful wife
Is reckoned as one of these misfortunes.
Are there no other sorts of comparisons
That you can use in your sayings, 
Without a poor wife's being one of them?
Thou also compare women's love to hell,
To barren land, where water may not remain.
Thou compare it also to Greek (inextinguishable) fire;
The more it burns, the more it has desire
To consume every thing that will be burned.
Thou sayest, just as worms destroy a tree,
Right so a wife destroys her husband;
This know they who are bound to wives.'
Gentlemen, right thus, as you have heard,
I firmly swore to my old husbands
That thus they said in their drunkenness;
And all was false, but I took witness
On Janekin, and on my niece also.
O Lord! The pain I did them and the woe,
Entirely guiltless (they were), by God's sweet pain!
For like a horse I could bite and whinny.
I could complain, and yet was in the wrong,
Or else many times had I been ruined.
Whoever first comes to the mill, first grinds;
I complained first, so was our war ended.
They were very glad to excuse themselves quickly
Of things of which they were never guilty in their lives.
Of wenches would I falsely accuse them,
When for sickness they could hardly stand.
Yet I tickled his heart, for he
Believed that I had of him so great affection!
I swore that all my walking out by night
Was to spy out wenches with whom he had intercourse;
Under that pretense I had many a mirth.
For all such wit is given us in our birth;
Deceit, weeping, spinning God has given
To women naturally, while they may live.
And thus of one thing I boast:
At the end I had the better in every way,
By trickery, or force, or by some such thing, 
As by continual grumbling or grouching.
Especially in bed they had misfortune:
There would I scold and do them no pleasure;
I would no longer in the bed abide,
If I felt his arm over my side,
Until he had paid his penalty to me;
Then would I allow him to do his foolishness.
And therefore this tale I tell to every man,
Anyone can profit, for everything is for sale; 
One can lure no hawks with an empty hand.
For profit I would endure all his lust,
And make me a feigned appetite;
And yet in bacon (old meat) I never had delight.
That made me so that I would always scold them,
For though the pope had sat beside them,
I would not spare them at their own table,
For, by my troth, I paid them back word for word.
As help me true God omnipotent,
Though I right now should make my will,
I owe them not one word that has not been avenged.
I brought it so about by my wit
That they had to give it up, as the best they could do,
Or else had we never been at peace;
For though he looked like a furious lion,
Yet should he fail to attain his goal.
Then I would say, `Sweetheart, see 
How meekly looks Willy, our sheep!
Come near, my spouse, let me kiss thy cheek!
You should be all patient and meek,
And have a sweet tender disposition,
Since you so preach of Job's patience.
Suffer always, since you so well can preach;
And unless you do, certainly we shall teach you 
That it is fair to have a wife in peace.
One of us two must bow, doubtless,
And since a man is more reasonable
Than a woman is, you must be able to bear suffering.
What ails you to grouch thus and groan?
Is it because you want to have my pudendum all to yourself?
Why, take it all! Lo, have it every bit!
By Saint Peter! I would curse you, if you did not love it well;
For if I would sell my `pretty thing,' 
I could walk as fresh (newly clothed) as is a rose;
But I will keep it for your own pleasure.
You are to blame, by God! I tell you the truth.'
Such sorts of words we had in hand. 
Now will I speak of my fourth husband.
My fourth husband was a reveller --
This is to say, he had a mistress --
And I was young and full of playfulness,
Stubborn and strong, and jolly as a magpie.
How well I could dance to a small harp,
And sing, indeed, like any nightingale,
When I had drunk a draft of sweet wine!
Metellius, the foul churl, the swine,
Who with a staff deprived his wife of her life,
Because she drank wine, if I had been his wife,
He should not have frightened me away from drink!
And after wine on Venus must I think,
For as surely as cold engenders hail,
A gluttonous mouth must have a lecherous tail.
In drunken women there is no defense --
This lechers know by experience.
But -- Lord Christ! -- when I remember
My youth, and my gaiety,
It tickles me to the bottom of my heart.
Unto this day it does my heart good
That I have had my world in my time.
But age, alas, that all will poison,
Has deprived me of my beauty and my vigor.
Let it go. Farewell! The devil go with it!
The flour is gone; there is no more to tell;
The bran, as I best can, now I must sell;
But yet I will try to be right merry.
Now will I tell of my fourth husband.
I say, I had in heart great anger
That he had delight in any other.
But he was paid back, by God and by Saint Joce!
I made him a cross of the same wood;
Not of my body, in no foul manner,
But certainly, I treated folk in such a way 
That I made him fry in his own grease 
For anger, and for pure jealousy.
By God, in earth I was his purgatory,
For which I hope his soul may be in glory.
For, God knows it, he sat very often and cried out in pain, 
When his shoe very bitterly pinched him.
There was no person who knew it, save God and he,
In many a way, how painfully I tortured him.
He died when I came from Jerusalem,
And lies buried under the rood beam, 
Although his tomb is not so elaborate
As was the sepulcher of that Darius,
Which Appelles wrought skillfully;
It is nothing but waste to bury him expensively.
Let him fare well; God give his soul rest!
He is now in his grave and in his casket.
Now of my fifth husband I will tell.
God let his soul never come in hell!
And yet he was to me the greatest scoundrel;
That feel I on my ribs one after another,
And ever shall unto my final day.
But in our bed he was so lively and gay,
And moreover he so well could deceive me,
When he would have my `pretty thing';
That though he had beat me on every bone,
He could win back my love straightway.
I believe I loved him best, because he
Was of his love standoffish to me. 
We women have, if I shall not lie,
In this matter a curious fantasy:
Note that whatever thing we may not easily have,
We will cry all day and crave for it.
Forbid us a thing, and we desire it;
Press on us fast, and then will we flee.
With niggardliness we spread out all our merchandise;
A great crowd at the market makes wares expensive,
And too great a supply makes them of little value: 
Every woman that is wise knows this.
My fifth husband -- God bless his soul! --
Whom I took for love, and no riches,
He was formerly a clerk of Oxford,
And had left school, and came home to board
With my close friend, dwelling in our town;
God have her soul! Her name was Alisoun.
She knew my heart, and also my secrets,
Better than our parish priest, as I may prosper!
To her I revealed all my secrets.
For had my husband pissed on a wall,
Or done a thing that should have cost his life,
To her, and to another worthy wife,
And to my niece, whom I loved well,
I would have told every one of his secrets.
And so I did very often, God knows it,
That made his face often red and hot
For true shame, and blamed himself because he
Had told to me so great a secret.
And so it happened that once in a Springtime --
Since frequently I went to visit my close friend, 
For I always loved to be gay,
And to walk in March, April, and May,
From house to house, to hear various bits of gossip --
That Jankin the clerk, and my close friend dame Alys,
And I myself, into the fields went.
My husband was at London all that Spring;
I had the better opportunity to amuse myself,
And to see, and also to be seen
By amorous folk. What did I know about where my good fortune 
Was destined to be, or in what place?
Therefore I made my visitations
To religious feasts and to processions, 
To preaching also, and to these pilgrimages,
To plays about miracles, and to marriages,
And wore my gay scarlet robes.
These worms, nor these moths, nor these mites,
Upon my peril (I swear), chewed on them never a bit;
And know thou why? Because they were well used.
Now will I tell forth what happened to me.
I say that in the fields we walked,
Until truly we had such flirtation,
This clerk and I, that for my provision for the future
I spoke to him and said to him how he,
If I were a widow, should wed me.
For certainly -- I say this for no boast --
I was never yet without providing beforehand 
For marriage, nor for other things also.
I hold a mouse's heart not worth a leek
That has but one hole to flee to,
If that should fail, then all is lost.
I falsely swore that he had enchanted me --
My mother taught me that trick --
And also I said I dreamed of him all night,
He would have slain me as I lay on my back,
And all my bed was full of real blood; 
`But yet I hope that you shall do me good,
For blood symbolizes gold, as I was taught.'
And all was false; I dreamed of it not at all, 
But I followed always my mother's teaching,
As well in this as in other things more.
But now, sir, let me see what I shall say.
A ha! By God, I have my tale again.
When my fourth husband was on the funeral bier,
I wept continuously, and acted sorry,
As wives must do, for it is the custom,
And with my kerchief covered my face,
But because I was provided with a mate,
I wept but little, and that I affirm.
To church was my husband carried in the morning
By neighbors, who for him made sorrow;
And Jankin, our clerk, was one of those.
As help me God, when I saw him go
After the bier, I thought he had a pair
Of legs and of feet so neat and fair
That all my heart I gave unto his keeping.
He was, I believe, twenty years old,
And I was forty, if I shall tell the truth;
But yet I had always a colt's tooth.
With teeth set wide apart I was, and that became me well;
I had the print of Saint Venus's seal.
As help me God, I was a lusty one,
And fair, and rich, and young, and well fixed,
And truly, as my husbands told me,
I had the best pudendum that might be. 
For certainly, I am all influenced by Venus
In feeling, and my heart is influenced by Mars.
Venus me gave my lust, my amorousness,
And Mars gave me my sturdy boldness;
My ascendant was Taurus, and Mars was therein.
Alas, alas! That ever love was sin!
I followed always my inclination
By virtue of the state of the heavens at my birth;
That made me that I could not withdraw
My chamber of Venus from a good fellow.
Yet have I Mars' mark upon my face,
And also in another private place.
For as God may be my salvation,
I never loved in moderation,
But always followed my appetite,
Whether he were short, or tall, or black-haired, or blond;
I took no notice, provided that he pleased me,
How poor he was, nor also of what rank.
What should I say but, at the month's end,
This jolly clerk, Jankin, that was so courteous,
Has wedded me with great solemnity,
And to him I gave all the land and property
That ever was given to me before then.
But afterward I repented very bitterly;
He would not allow me anything of my desires.
By God, he hit me once on the ear,
Because I tore a leaf out of his book,
So that of the stroke my ear became all deaf.
I was as stubborn as is a lioness,
And of my tongue a true chatterbox,
And I would walk, as I had done before,
From house to house, although he had sworn the contrary;
For which he often times would preach,
And teach me of old Roman stories;
How he, Simplicius Gallus, left his wife,
And forsook her for rest of all his life,
Because of nothing but because he saw her bare-headed
Looking out at his door one day.
Another Roman he told me by name,
Who, because his wife was at a midsummer revel
Without his knowledge, he forsook her also.
And then he would seek in his Bible
That same proverb of Ecclesiasticus
Where he commands and strictly forbids that
Man should suffer his wife go wander about.
Then would he say right thus, without doubt:
`Whoever builds his house all of willow twigs,
And spurs his blind horse over the open fields,
And suffers his wife to go on pilgrimages,
Is worthy to be hanged on the gallows!'
But all for nothing, I gave not a hawthorn berry 
For his proverbs nor for his old sayings,
Nor would I be corrected by him.
I hate him who tells me my vices,
And so do more of us, God knows, than I.
This made him all utterly furious with me;
I would not put up with him in any way.
Now will I tell you the truth, by Saint Thomas,
Why I tore a leaf out of his book,
For which he hit me so hard that I was deaf.
He had a book that regularly, night and day,
For his amusement he would always read;
He called it Valerie and Theofrastus,
At which book he always heartily laughed.
And also there was once a clerk at Rome,
A cardinal, who is called Saint Jerome,
That made a book against Jovinian;
In which book also there was Tertullian,
Crisippus, Trotula, and Heloise,
Who was abbess not far from Paris,
And also the Parables of Salomon,
Ovid's Art, and many other books,
And all these were bound in one volume.
And every night and day was his custom,
When he had leisure and spare time
From other worldly occupations,
To read in this book of wicked wives.
He knew of them more legends and lives
Than are of good women in the Bible.
For trust well, it is an impossibility
That any clerk will speak good of women,
Unless it be of holy saints' lives,
Nor of any other woman in any way.
Who painted the lion, tell me who?
By God, if women had written stories,
As clerks have within their studies, 
They would have written of men more wickedness
Than all the male sex could set right.
The children of Mercury (clerks) and of Venus (lovers)
Are directly contrary in their actions;
Mercury loves wisdom and knowledge,
And Venus loves riot and extravagant expenditures.
And, because of their diverse dispositions,
Each falls in the other's most powerful astronomical sign.
And thus, God knows, Mercury is powerless
In Pisces (the Fish), where Venus is exalted,
And Venus falls where Mercury is raised.
Therefore no woman is praised by any clerk.
The clerk, when he is old, and can not do
Any of Venus's works worth his old shoe,
Then he sits down, and writes in his dotage
That women can not keep their marriage!
But now to the point, why I told thee
That I was beaten for a book, by God!
Upon a night Jankin, that was master of our house,
Read on his book, as he sat by the fire,
Of Eve first, how for her wickedness
All mankind was brought to wretchedness,
For which Jesus Christ himself was slain,
Who bought us back with his heart's blood.
Lo, here clearly of woman you may find
That woman was the cause of the loss of all mankind.
Then he read me how Sampson lost his hair:
Sleeping, his lover cut it with her shears; 
Through which treason he lost both his eyes.
Then he read to me, if I shall not lie,
Of Hercules and of his Dianyre,
Who caused him to set himself on fire.
He forgot not a bit of the care and the woe
That Socrates had with his two wives,
How Xantippa caste piss upon his head.
This poor man sat still as if he were dead; 
He wiped his head, no more dared he say,
But `Before thunder stops, there comes a rain!'
Of Phasipha, that was the queen of Crete,
For sheer malignancy, he thought the tale sweet;
Fie! Speak no more -- it is a grisly thing --
Of her horrible lust and her pleasure.
Of Clitermystra, for her lechery,
That falsely made her husband to die,
He read it with very good devotion.
He told me also for what occasion
Amphiorax at Thebes lost his life.
My husband had a legend of his wife,
Eriphilem, that for a brooch of gold
Has secretly unto the Greeks told
Where her husband hid him in a place,
For which he had at Thebes a sad fate.
Of Livia told he me, and of Lucie:
They both made their husbands to die,
That one for love, that other was for hate.
Livia her husband, on a late evening,
Has poisoned, because she was his foe;
Lucia, lecherous, loved her husband so much
That, so that he should always think upon her,
She gave him such a sort of love-drink
That he was dead before it was morning;
And thus always husbands have sorrow.
Then he told me how one Latumius
Complained unto his fellow Arrius
That in his garden grew such a tree
On which he said how his three wives 
Hanged themselves for the malice of their hearts 
`O dear brother,' this Arrius said,
`Give me a shoot of that same blessed tree, 
And in my garden shall it be planted.'
Of latter date, of wives has he read
That some have slain their husbands in their bed,
And let her lecher copulate with her all the night,
When the corpse lay in the floor flat on its back.
And some have driven nails in their brains,
While they slept, and thus they had them slain.
Some have given them poison in their drink.
He spoke more harm than heart may imagine,
And concerning this he knew of more proverbs
Than in this world there grow grass or herbs.
`Better is,' he said, `thy habitation
Be with a lion or a foul dragon,
Than with a woman accustomed to scold.
Better is,' he said, `to stay high in the roof,
Than with an angry wife down in the house;
They are so wicked and contrary,
They always hate what their husbands love.'
He said, `A woman casts their shame away,
When she casts off her undergarment'; and furthermore,
`A fair woman, unless she is also chaste,
Is like a gold ring in a sow's nose.'
Who would believe, or who would suppose,
The woe that in my heart was, and pain?
And when I saw he would never cease
Reading on this cursed book all night,
All suddenly have I plucked three leaves 
Out of his book, right as he read, and also
I with my fist so hit him on the cheek
That in our fire he fell down backwards.
And he leaped up as does a furious lion,
And with his fist he hit me on the head
That on the floor I lay as if I were dead.
And when he saw how still I lay,
He was frightened and would have fled on his way,
Until at the last out of my swoon I awoke.
`O! hast thou slain me, false thief?' I said,
`And for my land thus hast thou murdered me?
Before I am dead, yet will I kiss thee.'
And near he came, and kneeled gently down,
And said, `Dear sister Alisoun,
So help me God, I shall never (again) smite thee!
What I have done, it is thyself to blame (you drove me to it). 
Forgive it me, and that I beseech thee!'
And yet immediately I hit him on the cheek,
And said, `Thief, thus much am I avenged;
Now will I die, I may no longer speak.'
But at the last, with much care and woe,
We made an agreement between our two selves. 
He gave me all the control in my hand,
To have the governance of house and land,
And of his tongue, and of his hand also;
And made him burn his book immediately right then.
And when I had gotten unto me,
By mastery, all the sovereignty,
And that he said, `My own true wife,
Do as you please the rest of all thy life;
Guard thy honor, and guard also my reputation' --
After that day we never had an argument.
As God may help me, I was to him as kind
As any wife from Denmark unto India,
And also true, and so was he to me.
I pray to God, who sits in majesty,
So bless his soul for his mercy dear.
Now will I say my tale, if you will hear."
The Friar laughed, when he had heard all this;
"Now dame," he said, "as I may have joy or bliss,
This is a long preamble of a tale!"
And when the Summoner heard the Friar cry out,
"Lo," said the Summoner, "By God's two arms!
A friar will always intrude himself (in others' affairs).
Lo, good men, a fly and also a friar
Will fall in every dish and also every discussion.
What speakest thou of perambulation?
What! amble, or trot, or keep still, or go sit down!
Thou spoil our fun in this manner."
"Yes, wilt thou have it thus, sir Summoner?" said the Friar;
"Now, by my faith I shall, before I go,
Tell of a summoner such a tale or two
That all the folk shall laugh in this place."
"Now otherwise, Friar, I curse thy face,"
Said this Summoner, "and I curse myself,
Unless I tell tales two or three
Of friars before I come to Siitingbourne
That I shall make thy heart to mourn,
For well I know thy patience is gone."
Our Host cried "Peace! And that right now!"
And said, "Let the woman tell her tale.
You act like folk that are drunk on ale.
Do, dame, tell forth your tale, and that is best."
"All ready, sir," she said, "right as you please,
If I have permission of this worthy Friar."
"Yes, dame," he said, "tell forth, and I will hear."
In the old days of King Arthur,
Of whom Britons speak great honor,
This land was all filled full of supernatural creatures. 
The elf-queen, with her jolly company,
Danced very often in many a green mead.
This was the old belief, as I read;
I speak of many hundred years ago.
But now no man can see any more elves,
For now the great charity and prayers
Of licensed beggars and other holy friars,
That overrun every land and every stream,
As thick as specks of dust in the sun-beam,
Blessing halls, chambers, kitchens, bedrooms,
Cities, towns, castles, high towers,
Villages, barns, stables, dairies --
This makes it that there are no fairies.
For where an elf was accustomed to walk 
There walks now the licensed begging friar himself
In late mornings and in early mornings,
And says his morning prayers and his holy things
As he goes in his assigned district.
Women may go safely up and down.
In every bush or under every tree
There is no other evil spirit but he,
And he will not do them any harm except dishonor.
And so it happened that this king Arthur
Had in his house a lusty bachelor,
That on one day came riding from hawking,
And it happened that, alone as he was born,
He saw a maiden walking before him,
Of which maiden straightway, despite all she could do,
By utter force, he took away her maidenhead;
For which wrong was such clamor
And such demand for justice unto king Arthur
That this knight was condemned to be dead,
By course of law, and should have lost his head --
Perhaps such was the statute then --
Except that the queen and other ladies as well
So long prayed the king for grace
Until he granted him his life right there,
And gave him to the queen, all at her will,
To choose whether she would him save or put to death.
The queen thanks the king with all her might,
And after this she spoke thus to the knight,
When she saw her time, upon a day:
"Thou standest yet," she said, "in such condition,
That of thy life yet thou hast no assurance
I grant thee life, if thou canst tell me
What thing it is that women most desire.
Beware, and keep thy neck-bone from iron (axe)!
And if thou canst not tell it right now,
Yet I will give thee leave to go
A twelvemonth and a day, to seek to learn
A satisfactory answer in this matter;
And I will have, before thou go, a pledge 
To surrender thy body in this place."
Woe was this knight, and sorrowfully he sighs;
But what! He can not do all as he pleases.
And at the last he chose to leave
And come again, exactly at the year's end,
With such answer as God would provide him;
And takes his leave, and goes forth on his way.
He seeks every house and every place
Where he hopes to have the luck
To learn what thing women love most,
But he could not arrive in any region
Where he might find in this matter
Two creatures agreeing together.
Some said women love riches best,
Some said honor, some said gaiety,
Some rich clothing, some said lust in bed,
And frequently to be widow and wedded.
Some said that our hearts are most eased
When we are flattered and pleased.
He goes very near the truth, I will not lie.
A man shall win us best with flattery,
And with attentions and with solicitude
We are caught, every one of us.
And some say that we love best
To be free and do just as we please,
And that no man reprove us for our vices,
But say that we are wise and not at all silly.
For truly there is not one of us all,
If any one will scratch us on the sore spot, 
That we will not kick back, because he tells us the truth.
Try it, and whoever so does shall find it true;
For, be we never so vicious within,
We want to be considered wise and clean of sin.
And some say that we have great delight 
To be considered steadfast, and also (able to keep a) secret,
And in one purpose steadfastly to remain,
And not reveal things that men tell us.
But that tale is not worth a rake handle.
By God, we women can hide nothing;
Witness on Midas -- will you hear the tale?
Ovid, among other small matters, 
Said Midas had, under his long hair,
Two ass's ears, growing upon his head,
The which vice he hid as he best could
Very skillfully from every man's sight,
That, except for his wife, there knew of it no others.
He loved her most, and trusted her also;
He prayed her that to no creature
She should tell of his disfigurement.
She swore him, "Nay"; for all this world to win,
She would not do that dishonor or sin,
To make her husband have so foul a reputation.
She would not tell it for her own shame.
But nonetheless, she thought that she would die
If she should hide a secret so long;
She thought it swelled so sore about her heart
That necessarily some word must escape her;
And since she dared tell it to no man,
She ran down to a marsh close by --
Until she came there her heart was afire --
And as a bittern bumbles in the mire,
She laid her mouth down unto the water:
"Betray me not, thou water, with thy sound,"
She said; "to thee I tell it and no others;
My husband has two long asses ears!
Now is my heart all whole; now is it out.
I could no longer keep it, without doubt."
Here you may see, though we a time abide,
Yet out it must come; we can hide no secret.
The remnant of the tale if you will hear,
Read Ovid, and there you may learn it.
This knight, of whom my tale is in particular,
When he saw he might not come to that --
This is to say, what women love most --
Within his breast very sorrowful was the spirit.
But home he goes; he could not linger;
The day was come that homeward he must turn.
And in his way he happened to ride,
In all this care, near a forest side,
Where he saw upon a dance go
Ladies four and twenty, and yet more;
Toward the which dance he drew very eagerly,
In hope that he should learn some wisdom.
But certainly, before he came fully there,
Vanished was this dance, he knew not where.
He saw no creature that bore life,
Save on the green he saw sitting a woman --
There can no man imagine an uglier creature.
At the knight's coming this old wife did rise,
And said, "Sir knight, there lies no road out of here.
Tell me what you seek, by your faith!
Perhaps it may be the better;
These old folk know many things," she said.
"My dear mother," said this knight, "certainly
I am as good as dead unless I can say
What thing it is that women most desire.
If you could teach me, I would well repay you."
"Pledge me thy word here in my hand," she said,
"The next thing that I require of thee,
Thou shalt do it, if it lies in thy power,
And I will tell it to you before it is night."
"Have here my pledged word," said the knight, "I agree."
"Then," she said, "I dare me well boast
Thy life is safe, for I will stand thereby;
Upon my life, the queen will say as I.
Let's see which is the proudest of them all
That wears a kerchief or a hairnet
That dares say `nay' of what I shall teach thee.
Let us go forth without longer speech."
Then she whispered a message in his ear,
And commanded him to be glad and have no fear.
When they are come to the court, this knight
Said he had held his day, as he had promised,
And his answer was ready, as he said.
Very many a noble wife, and many a maid,
And many a widow, because they are wise,
The queen herself sitting as a justice,
Are assembled, to hear his answer;
And afterward this knight was commanded to appear.
Silence was commanded to every person,
And that the knight should tell in open court
What thing (it is) that worldly women love best.
This knight stood not silent as does a beast,
But to his question straightway answered
With manly voice, so that all the court heard it:
"My liege lady, without exception," he said,
"Women desire to have sovereignty
As well over her husband as her love,
And to be in mastery above him.
This is your greatest desire, though you kill me.
Do as you please; I am here subject to your will."
In all the court there was not wife, nor maid,
Nor widow that denied what he said,
But said that he was worthy to have his life.
And with that word up sprang the old woman,
Whom the knight saw sitting on the green:
"Mercy," she said, "my sovereign lady queen!
Before your court departs, do me justice.
I taught this answer to the knight;
For which he pledged me his word there,
The first thing that I would ask of him
He would do, if it lay in his power.
Before the court then I pray thee, sir knight,"
Said she, "that thou take me as thy wife,
For well thou know that I have saved thy life.
If I say false, say `nay', upon thy faith!"
This knight answered, "Alas and woe is me!
I know right well that such was my promise.
For God's love, choose a new request!
Take all my goods and let my body go."
"Nay, then," she said, "I curse both of us two!
For though I am ugly, and old, and poor
I would not for all the metal, nor for ore
That under earth is buried or lies above,
Have anything except that I were thy wife, and also thy love."
"My love?" he said, "nay, my damnation!
Alas, that any of my family
Should ever be so foully degraded!"
But all for naught; the end is this, that he
Constrained was; he must by necessity wed her,
And takes his old wife, and goes to bed.
Now would some men say, perhaps,
That because of my negligence I make no effort
To tell you the joy and all the rich display
That was at the (wedding) feast that same day.
To which thing shortly I shall answer:
I say there was no joy nor feast at all;
There was nothing but heaviness and much sorrow.
For he wedded her in private in the morning,
And all day after hid himself like an owl,
So woeful was he, his wife looked so ugly.
Great was the woe the knight had in his thought,
When he was brought to bed with his wife;
He wallows and he turns to and fro.
His old wife lay smiling evermore,
And said, "O dear husband, bless me!
Does every knight behave thus with his wife as you do?
Is this the law of king Arthur's house?
Is every knight of his so aloof?
I am your own love and your wife;
I am she who has saved your life,
And, certainly, I did you never wrong yet;
Why behave you thus with me this first night?
You act like a man who had lost his wit.
What is my offense? For God's love, tell it,
And it shall be amended, if I can."
"Amended?" said this knight, "Alas, nay, nay!
It will not be amended ever more.
Thou art so loathsome, and so old also,
And moreover descended from such low born lineage,
That little wonder is though I toss and twist about.
So would God my heart would burst!"
"Is this," she said, "the cause of your distress?"
"Yes, certainly," he said, "it is no wonder."
"Now, sir," she said, "I could amend all this,
If I pleased, before three days were past,
Providing that you might behave well towards me.
"But, since you speak of such nobility
As is descended out of old riches,
That therefore you should be noble men,
Such arrogance is not worth a hen.
Look who is most virtuous always,
In private and public, and most intends ever
To do the noble deeds that he can;
Take him for the greatest noble man.
Christ wants us to claim our nobility from him,
Not from our ancestors for their old riches.
For though they give us all their heritage,
For which we claim to be of noble lineage,
Yet they can not bequeath by any means
To any of us their virtuous living,
That made them be called noble men,
And commanded us to follow them in such matters.
"Well can the wise poet of Florence,
Who is called Dante, speak on this matter.
Lo, in such sort of rime is Dante's speech:
`Very seldom grows up from its small branches
Nobility of man, for God, of his goodness,
Wants us to claim our nobility from him';
For from our ancestors we can claim no thing 
Except temporal things, that may hurt and injure a man.
"Also every person knows this as well as I,
If nobility were planted naturally
Unto a certain lineage down the line,
Then in private and in public they would never cease
To do the just duties of nobility;
They could do no dishonor or vice.
"Take fire and bear it in the darkest house
Between this and the mount of Caucasus,
And let men shut the doors and go away;
Yet will the fire as brightly blaze and burn 
As if twenty thousand men might it behold;
Its natural function it will always hold,
On peril of my life (I say), until it dies.
"Here may you see well that nobility
Is not joined with possession,
Since folk not do behave as they should
Always, as does the fire, lo, in its nature.
For, God knows it, men may well often find
A lord's son doing shame and dishonor;
And he who will have praise for his noble birth,
Because he was born of a noble house
And had his noble and virtuous ancestors,
And will not himself do any noble deeds
Nor follow his noble ancestry that is dead,
He is not noble, be he duke or earl,
For churlish sinful deeds make a churl.
For nobility is nothing but renown
Of thy ancestors, for their great goodness,
Which is a thing not naturally part of thy person.
Thy nobility comes from God alone.
Then our true nobility comes from grace ;
It was not at all bequeathed to us with our social rank.
"Think how noble, as says Valerius,
Was that same Tullius Hostillius,
That out of poverty rose to high nobility.
Read Seneca, and read also Boethius;
There shall you see clearly that it is no doubt
That he is noble who does noble deeds.
And therefore, dear husband, I thus conclude:
Although it is so that my ancestors were rude,
Yet may the high God, and so hope I,
Grant me grace to live virtuously.
Then am I noble, when I begin
To live virtuously and abandon sin.
"And whereas you reprove me for poverty,
The high God, on whom we believe,
In voluntary poverty chose to live his life.
And certainly every man, maiden, or woman
Can understand that Jesus, heaven's king,
Would not choose a vicious form of living.
Glad poverty is an honest thing, certain;
This will Seneca and other clerks say.
Whoever considers himself satisfied with his poverty,
I consider him rich, although he had not a shirt.
He who covets is a poor person,
For he would have that which is not in his power;
But he who has nothing, nor covets to have anything,
Is rich, although you consider him but a knave.
True poverty, it rightly sings; 
Juvenal says of poverty merrily:
`The poor man, when he goes along the roadway,
Before the thieves he may sing and play.'
Poverty is a hateful good and, as I guess,
A very great remover of cares;
A great amender also of wisdom
To him that takes it in patience.
Poverty is this, although it may seem miserable:
A possession that no one will challenge.
Poverty very often, when a man is low,
Makes him know his God and also himself.
Poverty is an eye glass, as it seems to me,
Through which one may see his true friends.
And therefore, sir, since I do not injure you,
You (should) no longer reprove me for my poverty.
"Now, sir, of old age you reprove me;
And certainly, sir, though no authority
Were in any book, you gentlefolk of honor
Say that men should be courteous to an old person
And call him father, because of your nobility;
And authors shall I find, as I guess.
"Now where you say that I am ugly and old,
Than do not fear to be a cuckold;
For filth and old age, as I may prosper,
Are great guardians of chastity.
But nonetheless, since I know your delight,
I shall fulfill your worldly appetite.
"Choose now," she said, "one of these two things:
To have me ugly and old until I die,
And be to you a true, humble wife,
And never displease you in all my life,
Or else you will have me young and fair,
And take your chances of the crowd
That shall be at your house because of me,
Or in some other place, as it may well be.
Now choose yourself, whichever you please."
This knight deliberates and painfully sighs,
But at the last he said in this manner:
"My lady and my love, and wife so dear,
I put me in your wise governance;
Choose yourself which may be most pleasure
And most honor to you and me also.
I do not care which of the two,
For as it pleases you, is enough for me."
"Then have I gotten mastery of you," she said,
"Since I may choose and govern as I please?"
"Yes, certainly, wife," he said, "I consider it best."
"Kiss me," she said, "we are no longer angry,
For, by my troth, I will be to you both --
This is to say, yes, both fair and good.
I pray to God that I may die insane
Unless I to you be as good and true
As ever was wife, since the world was new.
And unless I am tomorrow morning as fair to be seen
As any lady, empress, or queen,
That is between the east and also the west,
Do with my life and death right as you please.
Cast up the curtain, look how it is."
And when the knight saw truly all this,
That she so was beautiful, and so young moreover,
For joy he clasped her in his two arms.
His heart bathed in a bath of bliss.
A thousand time in a row he did her kiss,
And she obeyed him in every thing
That might do him pleasure or enjoyment.
And thus they live unto their lives' end
In perfect joy; and Jesus Christ us send
Husbands meek, young, and vigorous in bed,
And grace to outlive them whom we wed;
And also I pray Jesus shorten their lives
That will not be governed by their wives;
And old and angry misers in spending,
God send them soon the very pestilence!
Know you not where there stands a little town
Which is called Bobbe-up-and-down,
Under the Blee, in Canterbury Way?
There began our Host to joke and play,
And said, "Sirs, what! Dun is in the mire!
Is there no man, for prayer nor for hire,
That will awake our fellow far behind us?
A thief might full easily rob and bind him.
See how he naps! See how, for cock's bones,
That he will soon fall from his horse!
Is that a cook of London, with bad luck (to him)?
Make him come forth, he knows his penance;
For he shall tell a tale, by my faith,
Although it be not worth a bundle of hay.
Awake, thou Cook," said he, "God give thee sorrow!
What ails thee to sleep in the morning?
Hast thou had fleas all night, or art thou drunk?
Or hast thou with some prostitute all night labored,
So that thou can not hold up thy head?"
This Cook, who was full pale and not at all red,
Said to our Host, "God bless my soul,
There is fallen on me such heaviness,
Know I not why, that I would rather sleep
Than  (have) the best gallon of wine in Cheapside."
"Well," said the Manciple, "if it may give relief
To thee, sir Cook, and be displeasing to no person,
Who rides here in this company,
And (providing) that our Host would (agree), of his courtesy,
I will for now excuse thee of thy tale.
For, in good faith, thy visage is full pale,
Thy eyes are dazed also, as it seems to me,
And, well I know, thy breath full sourly stinks:
That shows well thou art not in good health.
By me, certainly, thou shalt not be deceived.
See how he yawns, lo, this drunken fellow,
As though he would swallow us right away.
Keep thy mouth closed, man, by thy father's kin!
The devil of hell set his foot therein!
Thy cursed breath would infect us all.
Fie, stinking swine! Fie, may foul fortune thee befall!
Ah, take heed, sirs, of this lusty man.
Now, sweet sir, will you joust at the quintain? 
It seems to me you are in good shape for that!
I believe that you have drunk until you act like an ape,
And that is when men play with a straw."
And with this speech the Cook became angry and enraged,
And on the Manciple he began to shake his head fast
For lack of speech, and down the horse him threw,
Where he lay, until men lifted him up.
This was a fine feat of horsemanship by a cook!
Alas, he had not kept himself by his ladle (i.e., stayed home)!
And before he was again in his saddle,
There was great shoving both to and fro
To lift him up, and much care and woe,
So unwieldy was this sorry enfeebled soul.
And to the Manciple then spoke our Host:
"Because drink has domination
Upon this man, by my salvation,
I believe he would tell his tale badly.
For, were it wine or old or new ale
That he has drunk, he speaks in his nose,
And sneezes fast, and also he has a head cold.
"He has also more than enough to do 
To keep him and his horse out of the mud;
And if he fall from his horse again,
Then shall we all have enough to do
In lifting up his heavy drunken body.
Tell on thy tale; of him I take no account.
"But yet, Manciple, in faith thou art too foolish,
Thus openly to reprove him of his vice.
Another day he would, perhaps,
Recall thee and bring thee to the lure (like a hawk);
I mean, he would speak of small things,
As for to find fault with thy accounts,
That may not be honest, if it comes to proof."  
"No," said the Manciple, "that would be a great mischief!
In that way he could easily bring me into the trap.
Yet I would rather pay for the mare
That he rides on, than he should strive with me.
I will not anger him, as I may thrive!
That which I spoke, I said it in my joking.
And do you know what? I have here in a gourd
A draught of wine, yes, of a ripe grape,
And right away you shall see a good joke.
This Cook shall drink thereof, if I may.
Upon pain of death, he will not say me nay."
And certainly, to tell it as it was,
Of this vessel the Cook drank fast, alas!
Why did he need that? He drank enough before.
And when he had blown in this horn,
To the Manciple he gave the gourd again;
And of that drink the Cook was wonderfully pleased,
And thanked him in such a way as he could.
Then began our Host to laugh wonderfully loud,
And said, "I see well it is necessary,
Wherever we go, to carry good drink with us;
For that will turn rancor and strife
To accord and love, and appease many a wrong.
"O Bacchus, blessed be thy name,
Who so can turn earnest into game!
Worship and thanks be to thy deity!
Of that matter you get no more of me.
Tell on thy tale, Manciple, I thee pray."
"Well, sir," said he, "now hearken what I say."
When Phoebus dwelled down here in this earth,
As old books make mention,
He was the most lusty bachelor
In all this world, and also the best archer.
He slew Phitoun, the serpent, as he lay
Sleeping in the sun upon a day;
And many another noble worthy deed
He wrought with his bow, as men may read.
He could play on every minstrelsy,
And sing so that it was a pleasure
To hear of his clear voice the sound.
Certainly the king of Thebes, Amphioun,
Who with his singing walled that city,
Could never sing half so well as he.  
Thereto he was the best looking man
That is or was since the world began.
What needs it his features to describe?
For in this world was no one so handsome alive.
He was therewith filled full of nobility,
Of honor, and of perfect worthiness.
This Phoebus, which was the flower of knighthood,
As well in generosity as in chivalry,
For his amusement, in sign also of victory
Over Phitoun, as tells us the story,
Was accustomed to bear in his hand a bow.
Now had this Phoebus in his house a crow
Which in a cage he fostered many a day,
And taught it to speak, as men teach a jay.
White was this crow as is a snow-white swan,
And imitate the speech of every man
He could, when he should tell a tale.
Therewith in all this world no nightingale
Could not, by a hundred thousand times,
Sing so wonderfully merrily and well.
Now had this Phoebus in his house a woman
Whom he loved more than his life,
And night and day did ever his efforts
To please her and do her reverence,
Save only, if I shall say the truth,
Jealous he was, and would eagerly have kept her.
For he was loath to be tricked,
And so is every person in such a situation;
But all in vain, for it does not help.
A good wife, who is clean of deed and thought,
Should not be constantly watched, certainly;
And truly the labor is in vain
To keep a shrew, for it will not be.
This hold I for a real act of folly,
To waste labor guarding wives:
Thus wrote old clerks in their time.
But now to purpose, as I first began:
This worthy Phoebus does all that he can
To please her, supposing for such pleasing actions,
And for his manly qualities and his behavior,
That no man should have put him out of her grace.
But God knows it, there can no man embrace
And restrain a thing which nature
Has naturally set in a creature.
Take any bird, and put it in a cage,
And give all thy attention and take thy pains
To foster it tenderly with food and drink
Of all dainties that thou can imagine,
And keep it as cleanly as thou can,
Although his cage of gold be never so gay,
Yet would this bird, by twenty thousand times,
Rather in a forest that is rude and cold
Go eat worms and such wretched food.
For ever this bird will work diligently
To escape out of his cage, if he can.
His liberty this bird desires always.
Let's take a cat, and foster him well with milk
And tender meat, and make his couch of silk,
And let him see a mouse go by the wall,
Right then he refuses milk and meat and all,
And every dainty that is in that house,
Such appetite has he to eat a mouse.
Lo, here has lust his domination,
And appetite drives away discretion.
A she-wolf has also an evil nature.
The most crude wolf that she can find,
Or least of reputation, will she take,
In time when she lusts to have a mate.
All these examples I about speak these men
That are untrue, and nothing about women.
For men have ever a lecherous appetite
On lower things to perform their delight
Than on their wives, be they never so fair,
Nor never so true, nor so gracious.
Flesh is so fond of novelty, curses on it,    
That we can not take pleasure in anything 
That is consonant with virtue for any length of time.
This Phoebus, who thought upon no guile,
Deceived was, despite all his attractive qualities.
For under him another had she,
A man of little reputation,
Worth nothing in comparison to Phoebus.
The more harm is, it happens often so,
Of which there comes much harm and woe.
And so befell, when Phoebus was absent,
His wife immediately has for her sweetheart sent.
Her sweetheart? Certes, this is a knavish speech!
Forgive it me, and that I you beseech.
The wise Plato says, as you may read,
The word must by necessity accord with the deed.
If men shall tell a thing properly,
The word must be cousin to the deed.
I am an unlearned man, right thus say I:
There is no difference, truly,
Between a wife that is of high degree,
If of her body dishonest she bee,
And a poor wench, other than this --
If it so be they work both amiss --
Except that the gentle, higher in rank,
She shall be called his lady, as in love;
And because that other is a poor woman,
She shall be called his wench or his sweetie.
And, God it knows, my own dear brother,
Men lay that one as low as lies that other.
Right so between an usurping tyrant
And an outlaw or an arrant thief,
The same I say: there is no difference.
To Alexander was told this sentence,
That, because the tyrant is of greater might
By the size of his army to slay downright,
And burn house and home, and level everything,
Lo, therefore is he called a captain;
And because the outlaw has but a small group of followers,
And can not do as much harm as he,
Nor bring a country to such great mischief,
Men call him an outlaw or a thief.
But because I am not a learned man,
I will tell nothing of texts, never a bit;
I will go to my tale, as I began.
When Phoebus wife had sent for her leman,
Right away they satisfied all their reckless lust.
The white crow, that hanged always in the cage,
Beheld their work, and said never a word.
And when home was come Phoebus, the lord,
This crow sang "Cuckoo! Cuckoo! Cuckoo!"
"What, bird?" said Phoebus. "What song singest thou?
Were thou not accustomed so merrily to sing
That to my heart it was a rejoicing
To hear thy voice? Alas, what song is this?"
"By God," said he, "I sing not amiss.
Phoebus," said he, "for all thy worthiness,
For all thy beauty and thy nobility,
For all thy song and all thy music,
For all thy watching, thou hast been tricked
By one of little reputation,
Not worth, compared to thee, 
The value of a gnat, as I may thrive!
For on thy bed I saw him copulate with thy wife."
What more do you want? The crow immediately him told,
By clear evidence and by bold words,
How his wife had done her lechery,
To his great shame and to his great dishonor,
And told him repeatedly he saw it with his eyes.
This Phoebus began to turn away,
And thought his sorrowful heart would break in two.
His bow he bent, and set therein an arrow,
And in his ire his wife then has he slain.
This is the substance of it; there is no more to say;
For sorrow of which he broke his musical instruments,
Both harp, and lute, and cither, and psaltery;
And also he broke his arrows and his bow,
And after that thus spoke he to the crow:
"Traitor," said he, "with tongue of scorpion,
Thou hast me brought to my ruin;
Alas, that I was wrought! Why was I not dead?
O dear wife! O gem of delight!
Who were to me so stable and also so true,
Now liest thou dead, with face pale of hue,
Full guiltless, that dare I swear, indeed!
O rash hand, to do so foul a crime!
O troubled wit, O reckless anger,
That recklessly smites the guiltless!
O mistrust, full of false suspicion,
Where was thy wit and thy discretion?
O every man, beware of rashness!
Do not believe any thing without strong evidence.
Smite not too soon, before you know why,
And be advised well and soberly
Before you act in any way 
Upon your anger caused by suspicion.
Alas, a thousand folk has rash anger
Completely undone, and brought them in the mire.
Alas! For sorrow I will myself slay!"
And to the crow, "O false thief!" said he,
"I will pay thee back immediately (for) thy false tale.
Thou once sang like a nightingale;
Now shalt thou, false thief, give up thy song,
And also thy white feathers every one,
Nor never in all thy life shalt thou speak.
Thus shall men on a traitor be avenged;
Thou and thy offspring ever shall be black,
Nor never sweet noise shall you make,
But ever cry in anticipation of tempest and rain,
As a sign that through thee my wife is slain."
And to the crow he rushed, and that right away,
And pulled out his white feathers every one,
And made him black, and took away all his song,
And also his speech, and out the door slung him 
Unto the devil, to whom I commit him;
And because of this case all crows are black.
Gentlemen, by this example I you pray,
Beware, and take care what you say:
And tell never any man in your life
How another man has copulated with his wife;
He will hate you mortally, certainly.
Dan Salomon, as wise clerks say,
Teaches a man to guard his tongue well.
But, as I said, I am not learned.
But nonetheless, thus taught me my mother:
"My son, think on the crow, in God's name!
My son, hold well thy tongue, and keep thy friend.
A wicked tongue is worse than a fiend;
My son, from a fiend men can bless themselves.
My son, God of his endless goodness
Walled a tongue with teeth and lips also,
So that man should think about what he may speak.
My son, very often, for too much speech
Has many a man been ruined, as clerks teach,
But for little speech well considered
Is no man harmed, to speak generally.
My son, thy tongue thou should restrain
At all times, but when thou make an effort
To speak of God, in honor and prayer.
The first virtue, son, if thou will learn,
Is to restrain and guard well thy tongue;
Thus learn children when they are young.
My son, of much ill-considered speaking,
Where less speaking had well enough sufficed,
Comes much harm; thus was me told and taught.
In much speech sin is not lacking.
Knowest thou what a rash tongue serves for?
Right as a sword cuts and carves
An arm in two, my dear son, just so
A tongue cuts friendship all in two.
A tale-teller is to God abominable.
Read Salomon, so wise and honorable;
Read David in his psalms; read Seneca.
My son, speak not, but with thy head thou nod.
Act as if thou were deaf, if thou hear
A tale-teller speak of perilous matter.
The Fleming says, and learn it if thou please,
That little tale-telling causes much rest.
My son, if thou no wicked word hast said,
Thou need not dread to be betrayed;
But he who has spoken evil, I dare well say,
He can by no way call his word back.
Thing that is said is said, and forth it goes,
Though he repent, or be ever so unwilling (it be known).
He is his slave to whom he has said
A tale of which he is now very sorry.
My son, beware, and be no author new
Of tidings, whether they be false or true.
Wherever thou come, amongst high or low,
Hold well thy tongue and think upon the crow."
I suppose men would consider it negligence
If I forget to tell the expenditure
Of Theseus, who goes (about) so busily
To build the lists royally,
That such a noble theatre as it was
I dare well say there was not (another such) in this world.
The circumference was a mile around,
Walled with stone, and surrounded by a ditch.
Round was the shape, in the manner of a circle,
Full of tiers of seats, the height of sixty paces,
That when a man was set on one tier of seats,
He did not hinder his fellow from seeing.
Eastward there stood a gate of white marble,
Westward just such another on the opposite (side).
And shortly to conclude, such a place
Was none in earth, (constructed) in so little time;
For in the land there was no skilled man
Who knows geometry or arithmetic,
Nor painter, nor carver of images,
That Theseus did not give him food and wages
To make and devise the theatre.
And to do his rite and sacrifice,
He has eastward, upon the gate above,
In worship of Venus, goddess of love,
Had made an altar and a chapel;
And on the westward gate, in memory
Of Mars, he has made just such another,
That cost fully a cartload of gold.
And northward, in a turret on the wall,
Of white alabaster and red coral,
A chapel, rich to look upon,
In worship of Diana of chastity,
Has Theseus had made in noble style.
But yet had I forgotten to describe
The noble sculpture and the portraits,
The shape, the appearance, and the figures
That were in these three chapels.
First in the temple of Venus canst thou see
Wrought on the wall, full piteous to behold,
The broken sleeps, and the cold sighs,
The sacred tears, and the lamenting,
The fiery strokes of the desiring
That love's servants endure in this life;
The oaths that assure their covenants;
Pleasure and Hope, Desire, Foolhardiness,
Beauty and Youth, Mirth, Riches,
Charms and Force, Lies, Flattery,
Expenditures, Attentiveness, and Jealousy,
Who wore a garland of yellow marigolds,
And a cuckoo sitting on her hand;
Feasts, musical instruments, dance-songs, dances,
Desire and festivity, and all the details
Of love, which I recounted and shall recount,
Were painted in sequence on the wall,
And more than I can make mention of.
For truly all the mount of Cithaeron,
Where Venus has her principal dwelling,
Was shown on the wall in portraits,
With all the garden (of Love) and the pleasure.
The porter, Idleness, was not forgotten 
Nor the handsome Narcissus of many years ago,
Nor yet the folly of king Solomon,
Nor yet the great strength of Hercules --
The enchantments of Medea and Circes --
Nor of Turnus, with the hardy fierce courage,
The riche Cresus, wretched in servitude.
Thus can you see that wisdom nor riches,
Beauty nor trickery, strength nor bravery,
Can not share power with Venus,
For she may rule the world as she pleases.
Lo, all these folk were so caught in her snare,
Until for woe they very often said "alas!"
One or two examples here suffice,
Even though I could recount a thousand more.
The statue of Venus, glorious to look upon,
Was naked, floating in the large sea,
And from the navel down all was covered 
With waves green and bright as any glass.
She had a citole (zither-like instrument) in her right hand,
And on her head, very elegant to look upon,
A rose garland, fresh and fragrant;
Above her head her doves fluttering.
Before her stood her son Cupid;
He had two wings upon his shoulders,
And he was blind, as it is often seen;
He carried a bow and arrows bright and keen.
Why should I not as well also tell you all
The portraiture that was upon the wall
Within the temple of mighty Mars the red?
All painted was the wall, in length and breadth,
Like to the interior of the grisly place
That is called the Great Temple of Mars in Thrace,
In that same cold, frosty region
Where Mars has his most excellent mansion.  
First a forest was painted on the wall,
In which there dwells neither man nor beast,
With knotty, gnarled, barren old trees,
Of stumps sharp and hideous to behold,
Through which there ran a rumbling in a moaning of wind,
As though a storm should burst every bough.
And downward from a hill, close to a grassy slope,
There stood the temple of Mars, powerful in arms,
Wrought all of burnished steel, of which the entry
Was long and narrow, and frightening to look upon.  
And out of there came a rush of wind and such a blast
That it made all the gate to shake.
The northern light shone in at the doors,
For there was no window on the wall,
Through which men might discern any light.
The door was all of eternal adamant (hardest of stones),
Bound crosswise and lengthwise 
With tough iron; and to make it strong,
Every pillar, to support the temple,
Was big as a large barrel, (made) of iron bright and shining.
There I saw first the malicious plotting
Of Felony, and all the scheming;
The cruel Anger, red as any glowing coal;
The pick-purse, and also the pale Fear;
The smiler with the knife under the cloak;
The stable burning with the black smoke;
The treason of the murdering in the bed;
The open war, all covered with blood from wounds:
Strife, with bloody knife and sharp menacing.
All full of creaking was that sorry place.
There yet I saw slayer of himself there --
His heart-blood has bathed all his hair --
The nail driven in the top of the head at night;
The cold death, with mouth gaping upwards.
Amidst the temple sat Misfortune,
With grief and sorry countenance.
Yet I saw Madness, laughing in his rage,
Armed Discontent, Alarm, and fierce Violence;
The corpse in the woods, with (its) throat cut;
A thousand slain, and not killed by the plague;
The tyrant, with his prey taken by force;
The town destroyed, there was nothing left.
Yet I saw burned the ships dancing (on the waves);
The hunter killed by the wild bears;
The sow devouring the child right in the cradle;
The cook scalded, despite his long-handled spoon.
Nothing concerning the evil influence of Mars was forgotten.
The wagon driver run over by his wagon --   
He lay down full low under the wheel.
There were also, of those influenced by Mars,
The barber, and the butcher, and the smith,
Who forges sharp swords on his anvil.
And all above, painted in a tower,
I saw conquest, sitting in great honor,
With the sharp sword over his head
Hanging by a thin thread of twine.
Depicted was the slaughter of Julius,
Of great Nero, and of Antonius;
Although at that same time they were unborn,
Yet was their death depicted before then
By menacing of Mars, according to the horoscope;
So was it shown in that portraiture,
As is depicted in the stars above
Who shall be slain or else dead for love.
Suffices one illustrative tale in old histories; 
I can not recount them all even if I desired to.
The statue of Mars stood upon a chariot
Armed, and looked as grim as if he were mad;
And over his head there shine two figures
Of stars, that are called in books,
That one Puella, that other Rubeus --
This god of arms was arrayed thus.
A wolf stood there before him at his feet
With red eyes, and he ate of a man;
With subtle brush was depicted this story
In reverence of Mars and of his glory.
Now to the temple of Diana the chaste,
As briefly as I can, I will hasten myself,
To tell you all the description.
The walls are painted all over
(With scenes) of hunting and of modest chastity.
There I saw how woeful Callisto,
When Diana was angry with her,
Was turned from a woman into a bear,
And after she was made the North Star
Thus was it painted; I can tell you no more.
Her son is also a star, as one can see.
There I saw Daphne, turned into a tree --
I mean not the goddess Diana,
But Penneus' daughter, who is called Daphne.
There I saw Actaeon changed into a hart,
For vengeance that he saw Diana all naked;
I saw how his hounds have caught him 
And devoured him, because they did not know him.
Yet was painted a little further on 
How Atalanta hunted the wild boar,
And Meleager, and many more others,
For which Diana wrought him care and woe.
There I saw many another wonderful story,
The which I do not desire to call to mind.
This goddess sat full high on a hart,
With small hounds all about her feet,
And underneath her feet she had a moon --
Waxing it was and should wane soon.
Her statue was clothed in yellowish green,
With bow in hand and arrows in a quiver.
She cast her eyes down full low 
Where Pluto has his dark region.
A woman in childbirth was before her;
But because her child was so long unborn,
Very piteously did she call on Lucina 
And said, "Help, for thou canst (do so) best of all!"
He who made it well knew how to paint in a life-like manner;
With many a florin he bought the paints.
Now these lists are made, and Theseus,
Who at his great cost thus prepared
The temples and the theatre in all respects,
When it was done, it greatly pleased him.
But I will stop speaking of Theseus a little while,
And speak of Palamon and of Arcite.
The day of their return approaches,
When each one should bring a hundred knights
To decide the battle, as I told you.
And to Athens, to keep their agreement,
Each one of them has brought a hundred knights,
Well armed for the battle in all respects.
And surely many a man there believed
That never, since the world began,
To speak of knighthood of (the deeds of) their hand,
As far as God has made sea or land,
Was not of so few so noble a company.
For every person that loved chivalry
And would, willingly, have an outstanding reputation
Has prayed that he might participate in that game;
And well it was for him who was chosen to be there,
For if there fell tomorrow such a situation,
You know well that every vigorous  knight
Who loves passionately and has his might,
Were it in England or elsewhere,
They would, willingly, desire to be there --
To fight for a lady, bless me! 
It would be a pleasing sight to see.
And right so fared those with Palamon.
With him there went knights many a one;
One of them will be armed in a coat of mail,
And in a breastplate and a light tunic;
And one of them will have a set of plate armor;
And one of them will have a Prussian shield or a buckler;
One of them will be well armed on his legs,
And have an axe, and one a mace of steel --
There is no new fashion that has not been old.
They were armed, as I have told you,
Every one according to his preference.
There mayst thou seen, coming with Palamon,
Lycurgus himself, the great king of Thrace.
Black was his beard, and manly was his face;
The circles of his eyes in his head,
They glowed between yellow and red,
And he looked about like a griffin (with an eagle's head),
With shaggy hairs on his stout brows;
His limbs large, his muscles hard and strong,
His shoulders broad, his arms round and long;
And as was the fashion in his country,
He stood full high upon a chariot of gold,
With four white bulls in the traces.
Instead of a tunic with his coat of arms over his armor,
With claws yellow and bright as any gold, 
He had a bear's skin, coal-black because of age.
His long hair was combed behind his back;
Like any raven's feather it shone because of its blackness;
A wreath of gold, thick as an arm, of huge weight,
Upon his head, set full of bright stones,
Of fine rubies and of diamonds.
About his chariot there went white wolfhounds,
Twenty and more, as big as any steer,
To hunt for the lion or the deer,
And followed him with muzzles securely bound,
Wearing collars of gold, and rings for leashes filed round.
He had a hundred lords in his company,
Very well armed, with stern and stout hearts.
With Arcite, as people find in histories,
The great Emetreus, the king of India,
Upon a reddish-brown steed with trappings of steel,
Covered in cloth of gold, well decorated  (with geometric patterns),
Came riding like the god of arms, Mars.
His tunic with his coat of arms was of cloth of Tarsia (in Turkestan)
Adorned with pearls white and round and big;
His saddle was newly adorned with pure gold;
A short cloak hanging upon his shoulder,
Brimful of rubies red as sparkling fire;
His curly hair like rings was run (fashioned),
And that was yellow, and glittered like the sun.
His nose was high, his eyes bright lemon yellow,
His lips round, his color was ruddy;
A few freckles were sprinkled in his face,
Between yellow and somewhat mingled with black;
And as a lion he cast about his look.
I reckon his age at five and twenty years.
His beard had well begun to spring;
His voice was like a trumpet thundering.
Upon his head he wore of green laurel 
A garland, fresh and pleasing to look upon.
Upon his hand he carried for his delight
A tame eagle, white as any lily.
He had a hundred lords with him there,
All armed, except for their heads, in all their equipment,
Very richly in every detail.
For trust well that dukes, earls, kings
Were gathered in this noble company,
For love and for the benefit of chivalry.
About this king there ran on all sides  
Full many a tame lion and leopard.
And in this manner these lords, one and all,
Are come to the city on the Sunday 
About nine a.m., and in the town dismounted.
This Theseus, this duke, this worthy knight,
When he had brought them into his city,
And provided them lodging, each one according to his rank,
He feasts them, and does such great labor
To entertain them and do them all honor
That people still believe that the wit of no man
Of any rank could do better.
The music, the service at the feast,
The great gifts to every one,
The rich adornment of Theseus' palace,
Nor who sat first nor last upon the dais,
What ladies are fairest or best in dancing,
Or which of them can dance best and sing,
Nor who speaks most feelingly of love;
What hawks sit on the perch above,
What hounds lie down on the floor --
I now make no mention of all this,
But (speak only) of the substance; that seems to me the best.
Now comes the point, and listen if you please.
The Sunday night, before day began to spring,
When Palamon heard the lark sing
(Although it was not day by two hours,
Yet sang the lark) and Palamon right then
With pious heart and with a noble disposition,
He rose to go on his pilgrimage
To the blessed gracious Citherea --
I mean Venus, honorable and worshipful.
And in her (planetary) hour he walks forth slowly
Unto the lists where her temple was,
And down he kneels, and with humble expression
And painful heart he said as you shall hear:
"Fairest of the fair, O lady mine, Venus,
Daughter to Jove and spouse of Vulcan,
Thou maker of joy of the mount of Citheron,
For that same love thou haddest to Adonis,
Have pity on my bitter, smarting tears,
And take my humble prayer to thy heart.
Alas! I do not have any language to tell
The effects nor the torments of my hell;
My heart can not reveal my harms;
I am so befuddled that I can not say (anything)
But `Mercy, lady bright, who knowest well
My thought and seest what harms I feel!'
Consider all this and have pity upon my pain,
As surely as I shall for evermore,
According to my power (as much as I can), be thy true servant,
And make war always against chastity.
I make that my vow, providing you help me!
I care not to boast of arms 
Nor do I ask to have victory tomorrow,
Nor renown in this case, nor vain glory
Nor fame for deeds of arms proclaimed everywhere;
But I would have fully possession
Of Emelye, and die in thy service.
Find thou the manner how and in what way:
I care not if it may better be
To have victory over them, or they over me,
So that I have my lady in my arms.
For though it be true that Mars is god of arms,
Your power is so great in heaven above
That if you please, I shall well have my love.
I will worship thy temple evermore,
And on thy altar, whether I ride or walk (whatever I do),
I will do sacrifice and kindle fires.
And if you will not (do) so, my lady sweet,
Then I pray thee, tomorrow with a spear
That Arcite stab me through the heart.
Then I care not, when I have lost my life,
Though Arcite win her to be his wife.
This is the substance and goal of my prayer:
Give me my love, thou blessed dear lady."
When the prayer of Palamon was done,
He did his sacrifice, and that quickly,
Full piteously, with all due ceremony,
Although I tell not now his observances;
But at the last the statue of Venus shook,
And made a sign, whereby he understood
That his prayer was accepted that day.
For though the sign showed a delay,
Yet he knew well that his request was granted,
And with glad heart he went home very soon.
The third planetary hour after Palamon
Began to go to Venus' temple,
Up rose the sun, and up rose Emelye
And to the temple of Diana did hasten.
Her maidens, whom she led thither with her,
They had the fire full readily with them,
The incense, the cloths, and all the rest
That is needed for the sacrifice;
The horns full of mead, as was the custom --
There lacked nothing (needed) to do her sacrifice.
The temple smoking (with incense), full of fair cloths,
This Emelye, with gentle heart,
Washed her body with water of a well.
But how she did her rite I dare not tell,
Unless it be some thing in general; 
And yet it would be a pleasure to hear all.
To one who means well it would be no matter of concern;
But it is good for a man to be without restriction (speak freely).
Her bright hair was combed, all loose;
A crown of an evergreen oak 
Was set upon her head full fair and suitable.
Two fires on the altar did she kindle,
And did her duties, as men can behold
In Statius' Thebaid and such old books.
When the fire was kindled, with a pitiful expression
Unto Diana she spoke as you may hear:
"O chaste goddess of the green woods,
To whom both heaven and earth and sea is visible,
Queen of the dark and low reign of Pluto,
Goddess of maidens, whom my heart hast known
Full many a year, and knowest what I desire,
Keep me from thy vengeance and thy ire,
Which Acteon paid for cruelly.
Chaste goddess, well knowest thou that I
Desire to be a maiden all my life,
Nor never will I be no lover nor wife.
I am, thou knowest, yet of thy company,
A maiden, and love hunting and the chase,
And to walk in the wild woods,
And not to be a wife and be with child.
I do not desire to know company of man.
Now help me, lady, since you can and know how,
For those three forms that thou hast in thee.
And Palamon, that has such love to me,
And also Arcite, who loves me so painfully,
This grace I pray thee and ask no more,
Send love and peace between them two,
And turn away their hearts from me so
That all their hot love and their desire,
And all their intense torment, and their fire
Will be quenched, or turned to another place.
And if it so be thou wilt not do me grace,
Or if my destiny is shaped so
That I must by necessity have one of them two,
Send me him who most desires me.
Behold, goddess of clean chastity,
The bitter tears that fall on my cheeks.
Since thou art maiden and guardian of us all,
Thou care for and well conserve my maidenhood,
And while I live, as a maiden I will serve thee."
The fires burn brightly upon the altar,
While Emelye was thus in her prayer.
But suddenly she saw a curious sight,
For right away one of the fires quenched
And rekindled again, and after that straightway
That other fire was quenched and all gone;
And as it quenched it made a roaring sound,
As these wet brands do in their burning,
And at the brand's end (the fire) ran out straightway
As if it were many bloody drops;
For which so sorely frightened was Emelye
That she was well nigh mad and began to cry,
For she did not know what it signified,
But simply for fear has she cried thus,
And wept that it was a pity to hear.
And right then Diana did appear,
With bow in hand, just like a huntress,
And said, "Daughter, cease thy sadness.
Among the high gods it is affirmed,
And by eternal word written and confirmed,
Thou shalt be wedded unto one of those
Who have for thee so much care and woe,
But unto which of them I may not tell.
Farwell, for I can stay no longer .
The fires which burn on my altar 
Shall declare to thee, before thou go hence,
Thy destiny concerning love, as in this situation."
And with that word, the arrows in the quiver
Of the goddess clatter fast and ring,
And forth she went and vanished;
For which this Emelye was astonished,
And said, "What does this mean, alas?
I put me in thy protection,
Diana, and in thy power."
And home she goes at once the nearest way.
This is the substance; there is no more to say.
The next (planetary) hour of Mars following this,
Arcite has walked unto the temple 
Of fierce Mars to do his sacrifice,
With all the rites of his pagan manner (of worship).
With sorrowful heart and intense devotion,
Right thus to Mars he said his prayer:
"O strong god, who in the cold reigns 
Of Thrace art honored and considered lord,
And hast in every reign and every land
All the control of arms in thy hand,
And grants them fortune as it pleases thee to command.
Accept of me my sorrowful sacrifice.
If it so be that my youth may deserve,
And that my power be worthy to serve
Thy godhead, so that I may be one of thine,
Then pray I thee to have pity upon my pain.
For that same pain and that same hot fire
In which thou once burned for desire,
When that thou enjoyed the beauty
Of fair, young, fresh Venus the noble,
And haddest her in arms as you wished --
Although once things went wrong for you,
When Vulcan had caught thee in his snare
And found thee lying by his wife, alas! --
For that same sorrow that was in thy heart,
Have pity as well upon my painful sufferings. 
I am young and ignorant, as thou knowest,
And, as I suppose, injured most by love 
Than ever was any living creature,
For she that causes me to endure all this woe 
Nor cares never whether I sink or swim.
And well I know, before she may promise me mercy,
I must win her with strength in the lists,
And well I know, without help or grace
Of thee my strength can not avail.
Then help me, lord, tomorrow in my battle,
For that same fire that once burned thee,
As well as that same fire now burns me,
And bring it about so that I have victory tomorrow.
Mine be the labor, and thine be the glory!
I will most honor thy most excellent temple
Over any place, and always most labor
In thy pleasure and in thy strong crafts,
And in thy temple I will hang my banner 
And all the arms of my company,
And evermore, until that day I die,
Eternal fire I will provide before thee (on your altar).
And also I will bind myself to this vow:
My beard, my hair, that hangs long down,
That never yet felt injury
Of razor nor of shears, I will give thee,
And be thy true servant while I live.
Now, lord, have pity upon my painful sorrows;
Give me victory; I ask of thee no more."
The prayer of Arcite the strong stopped,
The rings that hung on the temple door,
And also the doors, clattered very fast,
Of which Arcite was somewhat afraid.
The fires upon the altar burned (so) brightly 
That it began to illuminate all the temple;
A sweet smell the ground at once yielded up,
And Arcite immediately raised up his hand,
And he cast more incense into the fire,
With more other rites; and at the last
The statue of Mars began to ring its coat of mail,
And with that sound he heard a murmuring
Very low and faint, that said thus, "Victory!"
For which he (Arcite) gave to Mars honor and glory.
And thus with joy and hope to fare well
Arcite at once is gone unto his lodging,
As happy as a fowl is for the bright sun.
And right away such strife there is begun,
Because of that same grant, in the heaven above, 
Between Venus, the goddess of love,
And Mars, the stern god powerful in arms,
That Jupiter was hard put to stop it,
Until the pale Saturn the hostile,
Who knew so many of old adventures,
Found in his old experience a plan
That he full soon has pleased every side.
As is truly said, old age has a great advantage;
In old age is both wisdom and experience;
One can outrun the old but not outwit them.
Saturn anon, to stop strife and fear,  
Although it is against his natural disposition,
He found a remedy for all this strife.
"My dear daughter Venus," said Saturn,
"My orbit, that has so wide (a course) to turn,
Has more power than any man knows.
Mine is the drowning in the sea so dark;
Mine is the imprisonment in the dark cell;
Mine is the killing and hanging by the throat,
The murmur (of discontent) and the churls' rebelling,
The grumbling, and the secret poisoning;
I exact vengeance and do full punishment,
While I dwell in the (zodiacal) sign of the lion.
Mine is the ruin of the high halls,
The falling of the towers and of the walls
Upon the miner or the carpenter.
I slew Sampson, shaking the pillar;
And mine are the cold maladies,
The dark treasons, and the old plots;
My (astrological) aspect is the father of pestilence.
Now weep no more; I shall do my diligence
So that Palamon, who is thine own knight,
Shall have his lady, as thou hast promised him.
Though Mars shall help his knight, yet nonetheless
Between you there must be peace sometime,
Although you are not of one (the same) temperament,
Which daily causes such dissension.
I am thy grandfather, ready (to do) as you wish;
Weep now no more; I will fulfill thy desire."
Now I will stop (speaking) of the gods above,
Of Mars, and of Venus, goddess of love,
And tell you as plainly as I can
The essential part, for which I began.
Once, as old histories tell us,
There was a duke who was called Theseus;
He was lord and governor of Athens,
And in his time such a conqueror
That there was no one greater under the sun.
Very many a powerful country had he won;
What with his wisdom and his chivalry,
He conquered all the land of the Amazons,
That once was called Scithia,
And wedded the queen Ypolita,
And brought her home with him into his country
With much glory and great ceremony,
And also her young sister Emelye.
And thus with victory and with festivity
I leave this noble duke riding to Athens,
And all his host in arms beside him.
And certainly, if it were not too long to hear,
I would have told you fully the manner
How the reign of Femenye was won
By Theseus and by his chivalry;
And of the great battle at that time
Between Athenians and Amazons;
And how Ypolita was besieged,
The fair, bold queen of Scithia;
And of the festivity that was at their wedding,
And of the storm at her home-coming;
But all that matter I must now forgo. 
I have, God knows, a large field to till,
And the oxen in my plow are weak.
The remnant of the tale is long enough.
Also I will not hinder any one of this company;
Let every fellow tell his tale in turn,
And let's see now who shall win the supper;
And where I left off, I will again begin.
This duke, of whom I make mention,
When he was come almost unto the town,
In all his prosperity and in his most pride,
He was aware, as he cast his eye aside,
Where there kneeled in the high way
A company of ladies, two by two,
Each after another, clad in black clothes;
But such a cry and such a woeful (lament) they make
That in this world is no living creature 
That (ever) heard lamentation such as this;
And of this cry they would not ever stop
Until they seized the reins of his bridle.
"What folk are you, who at my homecoming
So disturb my festival with crying?"
Said Theseus. "Have you such great envy
Of my honor, (you) who thus lament and cry?
Or who has injured or offended you?
And tell me if it may be remedied,
And why you are clothed thus in black."
The eldest lady of them all spoke,
After she had swooned with (so) deadly a countenance,
That it was pitiful to see and hear;
She said, "Lord, to whom Fortune has given
Victory, and (allowed) to live as a conqueror,
Your glory and your honor does not grieve us,
But we beseech (you for) mercy and succor.
Have mercy on our woe and our distress!
Some drop of pity, because of thy nobility,
Let thou fall upon us wretched women,
For, certainly, lord, there is not one of us all
Who has not been a duchesse or a queen.
Now we are miserable wretches, as it is easily seen,
Thanks be to Fortune and her false wheel,
Who assures no estate (will continue) to be well.
And certainly, lord, to await your presence,
Here in this temple of the goddess Clemency
We have been waiting all this fortnight.
Now help us, lord, since it is in thy power.
"I, wretch, who weep and wail thus,
Was once wife to king Cappaneus,
Who died at Thebes -- cursed be that day! --
And all of us who are in this condition
And make all this lamentation,
We lost all our husbands at that town,
While the siege lay around it.
And yet now the old Creon -- woe oh woe! --
Who is now lord of the city of Thebes,
Filled with anger and with iniquity,
He, for spite and for his tyranny,
To do dishonor to the dead bodies
Of all our lords who are slain,
Has dragged all the bodies in a heap,
And will not allow them, not at all, 
Neither to be buried nor burned,
But makes hounds eat them as an insult."
And with that word, without more delay,
They fell face down and cried piteously,
"Have some mercy on us wretched women,
And let our sorrow sink in thy heart."
This gentle duke leaped down from his war horse
With compassionate heart, when he heard them speak.
It seemed to him that his heart would break,
When he saw them so pitiful and so dejected,
That once were of such high rank;
And in his arms he caught up them all,
And comforts them with very good will,
And swore his oath, as he was true knight,
(That) he would do his might so completely
To avenge them upon the tyrant Creon 
That all the people of Greece should speak (about)
How Creon was treated by Theseus
As one who had very well deserved his death.
And right away, without more delay,
He displays his banner, and rode forth 
Toward Thebes, and all his army beside (him).
He would not walk nor ride any nearer to Athens,
Nor take his ease fully half a day,
But that night he lay (camped) on his way,
And sent straightway Ypolita the queen,
And Emelye, her beautiful young sister,
Unto the town of Athens to dwell,
And forth he rides; there is no more to tell.
The red statue of Mars, with spear and shield,
So shines in his large white banner
That all the fields glitter all around;
And by his banner is carried his pennon
Of very rich gold, in which there was embroidered
The Minotaur, which he defeated in Crete.
Thus rides this duke, thus rides this conqueror,
And in his army the flower of chivalry,
Until he came to Thebes and dismounted
Graciously in a field, where he intended to fight.
But briefly to speak of this thing,
With Creon, who was king of Thebes,
He fought, and slew him boldly as a knight
In open battle, and put the army to flight;
And by assault he won the city afterwards,
And tore down both wall and beam and rafter;
And he gave back to the ladies 
The bones of their husbands who were slain,
To do obsequies, as was then the custom.
But it would be all too long to describe 
The great clamor and the lamentation
That the ladies made at the burning
Of the bodies, and the great honor
That Theseus, the noble conqueror,
Does to the ladies, when they went from him;
But briefly to tell is my intent.
When this worthy duke, this Theseus,
Has slain Creon and thus won Thebes,
Still in that field he took all night his rest,
And did with all the country as he pleased.
To search in the heap of dead bodies,
To strip them of armor and of clothing,
The scavengers took great pains and worked hard
After the battle and defeat.
And (it) so befell that in the heap they found,
Pierced through with many a grievous bloody wound,
Two young knights lying side by side,
Both with the same coat of arms, very richly wrought,
Of which two one was called Arcite,
And that other knight was called Palamon.
They were not fully alive, nor fully dead,
But by their coats of arms and by their equipment
The heralds best knew them in particular
As they that were of the royal blood 
Of Thebes, and born of two sisters.
The scavengers have pulled them out of the heap,
And have carried them softy unto the tent
Of Theseus; and he very soon sent them 
To Athens, to dwell in prison
Perpetually -- he would not (accept) any ransom.
And when this worthy duke has thus done,
He took his army, and home he rides straightway
As a conqueror crowned with laurel;
And there he lives in joy and in honor
For the duration of his life; what more words are needed?
And in a tower, in anguish and in woe,
This Palamon and his fellow Arcite
For evermore (remain); no gold can ransom them.
This passes year by year and day by day,
Until it befell once, in a morning of May,
That Emelye, who was fairer to be seen 
Than is the lily upon its green stalk,
And fresher than the May with new flowers --
For her hue vied with color of the rose,
I do not know which was the finer of them two --
Before it was day, as was her custom to do,
She was arisen and all ready prepared,
For May will have no laziness at night.
The season urges on every gentle heart,
And makes it out of its sleep to awake suddenly,
And says "Arise, and do thy observance."
This made Emelye remember
To do honor to May, and to rise.
She was gaily clothed, so to say:
Her yellow hair was braided in a tress
Behind her back, a yard long, I guess.
And in the garden, at the rising of the sun,
She walks up and down, and as she pleases
She gathers flowers, mixed white and red,
To make an intricate garland for her head;
And she sang (as) heavenly as an angel.
The great tower, that was so thick and strong,
Which was the main fortification of the castle
(Where the knights were in prison
Of which I told yow and shall tell),
Was just next to the garden wall
Where this Emelye took her pleasure.
The sun was bright and clear that morning,
And Palamon, this woeful prisoner,
As was his custom, by permission of his jailer,
Had risen and roamed in a chamber on high,
In which he saw all the noble city,
And also the garden, full of green branches,
Where this fresh Emelye the bright
Was in her walk, and roamed up and down.
This sorrowful prisoner, this Palamon,
Goes in the chamber roaming to and fro
And to himself lamenting his woe.
That he was born, full often he said, "alas!"
And so it happened, by chance or accident,
That through a window, thickly set with many a bar
Of iron, great and square as any beam,
He cast his eye upon Emelye,
And with that he turned pale and cried, "A!"
As though he were stabbed unto the heart.
And with that cry Arcite immediately leaped up 
And said, "My cousin, what ails thee,
Who art so pale and deadly to look upon?
Why didst thou cry out? Who has done thee offence?
For the love of God, take all in patience
Our imprisonment, for it may not be otherwise.
Fortune has given us this adversity.
Some wicked aspect or disposition
Of Saturn, by some arrangement of the heavenly bodies,
Has given us this, although we had sworn it would not be;
So stood the heavens when we were born.
We must endure it; this is the short and plain."
This Palamon answered and said in reply,
"Cousin, truly, concerning this opinion
Thou hast a foolish conception.
This prison did not cause me to cry out,
But I was hurt right now through my eye
Into my heart, so that it will be the death of me.
The fairness of that lady whom I see
Yonder in the garden roaming to and fro
Is cause of all my crying and my woe.
I know not whether she is woman or goddess,
But truly it is Venus, as I suppose."
And with that he fell down on his knees,
And said, "Venus, if it be thy will
Thus to transfigure yourself in this garden 
Before me, sorrowful, wretched creature,
Help that we may escape out of this prison.
And if it be so that my destiny is shaped
By eternal decree to die in prison,
Have some compassion on our (noble) lineage
Which is brought so low by tyranny."
And with that word Arcite did see
Where this lady roamed to and fro,
And with that sight her beauty hurt him so,
That, if Palamon was sorely wounded,
Arcite is hurt as much as he, or more.
And with a sigh he said piteously,
"The fresh beauty slays me suddenly
Of her who roams in the yonder place;
And unless I have her mercy and her grace,
So that I can at least see her, 
I am as good as dead; there is no more to say."
This Palamon, when he heard those words,
Angrily he looked and answered,
"Sayest thou this in earnest or in play?"
"Nay," said Arcite, "in earnest, by my faith!
So help me God, I have no desire to play."
This Palamon did knit his two brows.
"It would not be," said he, "any great honor to thee 
To be false, nor to be traitor
To me, who am thy cousin and thy brother
Sworn very sincerely, and each of us to the other,
That never, though we had to die by torture,
Until death shall part us two,
Neither of us in love (is) to hinder the other,
Nor in any other case, my dear brother,
But rather thou shouldest truly help me
In every case, as I shall help thee --
This was thy oath, and mine also, certainly;
I know right well, thou darest not deny it.
Thus thou art my trusted confidant, without doubt,
And now thou wouldest falsely be busy preparing 
To love my lady, whom I love and serve,
And ever shall until my heart dies.
Nay, certainly, false Arcite, thou shalt not (do) so.
I loved hire first, and told thee my woe
As to my confidant and my sworn brother 
To further me, as I have told before.
For which thou art bound as a knight
To help me, if it lay in thy power,
Or else thou art false, I dare well say."
This Arcite full proudly spoke in return:
"Thou shalt," said he, "be rather false than I;
And thou art false, I tell thee flatly,
As a mistress I loved her first before thou.
What wilt thou say? Thou knowest not yet now
Whether she is a woman or goddess!
Thine is a feeling of holiness,
And mine is love as to a creature;
For which I told thee my circumstance
As to my cousin and my sworn brother.
I posit (this assumption): that thou lovedest her first;
Knowest thou not well the old clerks' saying,
That `who shall give a lover any law?'
Love is a greater law, by my skull,
Than may be given to any earthly man;
And therefore positive (man-made) law and such decree
Is broken every day for love in every way.
A man must of necessity love, in spite of all he can do;
He can not flee (from) it, though he should be dead,
Whether she be maid, or widow, or else wife.
And also it is not likely all thy life
To stand in her good graces; no more shall I;
For well thou thyself knowest, truly,
That thou and I are condemned to prison
Perpetually; no ransom can help us.
We strive as the hounds did for the bone;
They fought all day, and yet their share was nothing.
There came a kite, while they were so angry,
And carried away the bone between them both.
And therefore, at the king's court, my brother,
Each man for himself, there is no other (way).
Love, if it please thee, for I love and always shall;
And truly, dear brother, this is all.
Here in this prison we must endure,
And each one of us take his chance."
Great and long was the strife between them two,
If I had leisure to tell (it);
But to the point. It happened on a day,
To tell it to you as briefly as I can,
A worthy duke that was called  Perotheus,
Who was  a friend to duke Theseus
Since that same time that they were little children,
Had come to Athens to visit his friend,
And to amuse himself as he was accustomed to do;
For in this world he loved no man so (much),
And he (Theseus) loved him as tenderly in turn.
So well they loved, as old books say,
That when one was dead, truly to tell,
His friend went and sought him down in hell --
But of that story I do not desire to write.
Duke Perotheus loved well Arcite,
And had known him at Thebes year after year,
And finally at request and prayer
Of Perotheus, without any ransom,
Duke Theseus let him out of prison
Freely to go all over, wherever he wishes,
In such a manner as shall I tell you.
This was the agreement, plainly to write,
Between Theseus and this Arcite:
That if it so were that Arcite were found
Ever in his life, by day or night, at any moment
In any country of this Theseus,
And if he were caught, it was agreed thus,
That with a sword he should lose his head.
There was no other remedy nor course of action;
But (he) takes his leave, and homeward he sped.
Let him be ware! His neck lies as a pledge.
How great a sorrow now suffers Arcite!
He feels the death smite through his heart;
He weeps, wails, cries piteously;
To slay himself he secretly awaits (an opportunity).
He said, "Alas that day that I was born!
Now my prison is worse than before;
Now I am destined eternally to dwell
Not in purgatory, but in hell.
Alas, that ever I knew Perotheus!
For else I would have remained with Theseus,
Fettered in his prison evermore.
Then would I have been in bliss and not in woe.
Only the sight of her whom I serve,
Though I never can deserve her grace,
Would have sufficed right enough for me.
O dear cousin Palamon," said he,
"The victory of this adventure is thine.
Very blissfully in prison thou can remain --
In prison? Certainly not, but in paradise!
Well has Fortune turned the dice for thee,
That hast the sight of her, and I the absence.
For it is possible, since thou hast her presence,
And art a knight, a worthy and an able (one),
That by some chance, since Fortune is changeable,
Thou mayest sometime attain thy desire.
But I, who am exiled and barren
Of all grace, and in so great despair
That there is not earth, water, fire, nor air,
Nor creature that is made of them,
That can help me or do comfort (to me) in this,
Well ought I to die in despair and distress.
Farwell my life, my desire, and my gladness!
"Alas, why do folk so commonly complain 
About the providence of God, or of Fortune,
That gives them full often in many a manner
Much better than they can themselves imagine?
One man desires to have riches,
Which is the cause of his murder or great sickness;
And one man would happily (go) out of his prison,
Who is slain in his house by members of his household.
Infinite harms are in this matter.
We know not what thing we pray for here;
We act like one who is drunk as a mouse.
A drunk man knows well he has a house,
But he does not know which is the right way to it,
And to a drunk man the way is slippery.
And certainly, so we fare in this world;
We seek eagerly after felicity,
But we go wrong very often, truly.
Thus can we all say, and especially I,
Who supposed and had a firm belief
That if I might escape from prison,
Then I would have been in joy and perfect well-being,
Whereas now I am exiled from my source of happiness.
Since I can not see you, Emelye,
I am as good as dead; there is not any remedy."
Upon that other side Palamon,
When he knew Arcite was gone,
He makes such sorrow that the great tour
Resounds with his yowling and clamor.
The great fetters themselves on his shins 
Were wet from his bitter, salt tears.
"Alas," said he, "Arcite, cousin mine,
Of all our strife, God knows, the profit is thine.
Thou walkest freely now in Thebes,
And thou care little about my woe.
Thou mayest, since thou hast wisdom and manhood,
Assemble all the folk of our family,
And make a war so sharp on this city
That by some chance or some treaty
Thou mayest have her as lady and as wife
For whom I must of necessity lose my life.
For, as by way of possibility,
Since thou art at thy liberty, free of prison,
And art a lord, thy advantage is great,
More than is mine, who die here in a cage.
For I must weep and wail, while I live,
With all the woe that prison may give me,
And also with pain that love gives me also,
That doubles all my torment and my woe."
With that the fire of jealousy started up
Within his breast, and seized him by the heart
So madly that he was to look upon like 
The box tree or the ash dead and cold.
Then said he, "O cruel gods that govern
This world with binding of your eternal word,
And write in the table of adamant (hardest of stones)
Your decision and your eternal decree,
Why is mankind more obligated unto you 
Than is the sheep that cowers in the sheepfold?
For man is slain exactly like another beast,
And dwells also in prison and detention,
And has sickness and great adversity,
And often times guiltless, indeed.
"What (sort of) governance is in this foreknowledge,
That torments guiltless innocence?
And yet this increases all my suffering,
That man is bound to his duty,
For God's sake, to refrain from his desire,
Whereas a beast may fulfill all his desire.
And when a beast is dead he has no pain;   
But man after his death must weep and lament,
Though in this world he may have (had) care and woe.
Without doubt such is the case.
The answer to this I leave to theologians,
But well I know that great pain is in this world.
Alas, I see a serpent or a thief,
That has done mischief to many a true man,
Go at his liberty, and can go where he pleases.
But I must be in prison because of Saturn,
And also because of Juno, jealous and also mad,
Who has destroyed well nigh all the blood
Of Thebes with its wide devastated walls;
And Venus slays me on that other side
For jealousy and fear of this Arcite."
Now will I cease (speaking of) of Palamon for a little while,
And leave him to dwell in his prison still,
And of Arcite forth I will tell you.
The summer passes, and the long nights 
Increase doubly the strong pains 
Both of the lover and the prisoner.
I know not which has the more woeful task.
For, briefly to say (it), this Palamon
Is damned perpetually to prison,
In chains and in fetters to be dead;
And Arcite is exiled on threat of losing his head
For evermore, out of that country,
Nor nevermore shall see his lady.
Yow lovers now I ask this question:
Who has the worse, Arcite or Palamon?
That one may see his lady every day,
But in prison he must always dwell;
That other where he pleases may ride or walk,
But he shall see his lady nevermore.
Now judge as it pleases you, you who know (of such things),
For I will tell forth as I began.
"Whoa!" said the Knight, "good sire, no more of this!
What you have said is quite enough, indeed,
And much more; for a little sadness
Is quite enough for many people, I guess.
I say for myself, it is a great distress,
When men have been in great wealth and ease,
To hear of their sudden fall, alas!
And the contrary is joy and great comfort,
As when a man has been in a poor condition,
And climbs up and becomes fortunate,
And there remains in prosperity.
Such a thing is pleasing, as it seems to me,
And of such a thing it would be good to tell."
"Yea," said our Host, "by Saint Paul's bell!
You say the very truth; this Monk he chatters noisily.
He spoke of how Fortune covered with a cloud
I know not what; and also of a tragedy
Just now you heard, and by God, no remedy
Is it to bewail or lament
That which is done, and also it is a pain,
As you have said, to hear of sadness.
"Sir Monk, no more of this, as God may you bless!
Your tale annoys all this company.
Such talking is not worth a butterfly,
For in it there is no pleasure nor amusement.
Therefore, Sir Monk, dan Piers by your name,
I pray yow earnestly tell us something else;
For truly, were it not for the clinking of your bells
That on your bridle hang on every side,
By heaven's King who for us all died,
I should before this have fallen down because of sleepiness,
Although the mud had never been so deep;
Then had your tale been told all in vain.
For certainly, as these clerks say,
Where a man may have no hearers,
It is no use to tell his opinion.
"And well I know the capacity of appreciation is in me,
If any thing shall be well told.
Sir, say something about hunting, I you pray."
"Nay," said this Monk, "I have no desire to play.
Now let another tell, as I have told."
Then spoke oure Host with rude speech and bold,
And said unto the Nun's Priest straightway,
"Come near, thou priest, come hither, thou sir John!
Tell us such thing as may our hearts gladden.
Be happy, though thou ride upon a nag.
What if thy horse be both poor and lean?
If he will serve thee, care not a bean.
See that thy heart be merry evermore."
"Yes indeed, sir," said he, "yes indeed, Host, as I may I prosper,
Unless I be merry, indeed I will be blamed."
And right away his tale he has begun,
And thus he said unto us every one,
This sweet priest, this goodly man sir John.
A poor widow, somewhat advanced in age,
Was once dwelling in a small cottage,
Beside a grove, standing in a dale.
This widow, of whom I tell you my tale,
Since that same day that she was last a wife
In patience led a very simple life,
For little was her possessions and her income.
By husbandry of such as God sent her
She provided for herself and also her two daughters.
She had three large sows, and no more,
Three cows, and also a sheep that is called Malle.
Full sooty was her bedchamber and also her hall,
In which she ate very many a scanty meal.
She needed not a bit of spicy sauce.
No dainty morsel passed through her throat; 
Her diet was such as her farm produced.
Overeating never made her sick; 
Moderate diet was all her medical treatment,
And exercise, and a contented heart.
The gout not at all prevented her from dancing,
And apoplexy harmed not her head.
No wine she drank, neither white nor red; 
Her board was provided mostly with white and black --
Milk and dark bread, in which she found no lack,
Broiled bacon, and sometimes an egg or two,
For she was, as it were, a sort of dairywoman.
She had a yard, enclosed all around 
With sticks, and a dry ditch outside it,
In which she had a cock, called Chauntecleer.
In all the land, there was not his peer in crowing.
His voice was merrier than the merry organ
That goes in the church on mass-days.
Well more accurate was his crowing in his lodge
Than is a clock or an abbey timepiece.
By nature he knew (the hour of) each ascension
Of the celestial equator in that same town; 
For when degrees fifteen were ascended,
Then he crowed so that it could not be improved.
His comb was redder than the fine coral,
And notched with battlements as if it were a castle wall; 
His bill was black, and it shone like the jet stone; 
Like azure were his legs and his toes; 
His nails whiter than the lily flour,
And like the burnished gold was his color.
This gentle cock had in his governance
Seven hens to do all his pleasure,
Which were his sisters and his concubines,
And wonderfully like him, in their colors; 
Of which the fairest colored on her throat
Was called fair demoiselle Pertelote.
Courteous she was, discreet, and gracious,
And companionable, and bore herself so fair
Since that same day that she was seven nights old
That truly she has in possession the heart 
Of Chauntecleer, locked in every limb (completely); 
He loved her so that well was him because of that.
But such a joy it was to hear them sing,
When the bright sun began to spring,
In sweet accord, "My love has gone to the country!" --
For in that same time, as I have understood,
Beasts and birds could speak and sing.
And so befell that in a dawning,
As Chauntecleer among all his wives
Sat on his perch, that was in the hall,
And next to him sat this faire Pertelote,
This Chauntecleer began to groan in his throat,
As one that in his dream is deeply troubled.
And when Pertelote thus heard him roar,
She was aghast and said, "Dear heart,
What ails you, to groan in this manner?
You are a true (sound) sleeper; fie, for shame!"
And he answered, and said thus: "Madame,
I pray you that you take it not amiss.
By God, I dreamed I was in such mischief
Right now that yet my heart is grievously frightened.
Now God," said he, "interpret my dream correctly,
And keep my body out of foul prison!
I dreamed how I roamed up and down
Within our yard, where I saw a beast
Was like a hound, and would have seized 
Upon my body, and would have had me dead.
His color was between yellow and red,
And tipped was his tail and both his ears
With black, unlike the rest of his hair; 
His snout small, with two glowing eyes.
Yet for fear of his look I almost die; 
This caused my groaning, doubtless."
"Shame!" said she, "fie on you, coward!
Alas," said she, "for, by that God above,
Now have you lost my heart and all my love!
I can not love a coward, by my faith!
For certainly, whatever any woman says,
We all desire, if it might be,
To have husbands hardy, wise, and generous,
And secret -- and no miser, nor no fool,
Nor him who is afraid of every weapon,
Nor any boaster, by that God above!
How dare you say, for shame, unto your love
That any thing might make you afraid?
Have you no man's heart, and have a beard? 
Alas! And can you be frightened of dreams?
Nothing, God knows, but foolishness is in dreams.
Dreams are produced by overeating,
And often by stomach vapors and by the mixture of bodily humors,
When humors are too abundant in a person.
Certainly this dream, which you have dreamed to-night,
Comes of the great superfluity
Of your red choleric humor, indeed,
Which causes folk in their dreams to be afraid 
Of arrows, and of fire with red flames,
Of red beasts, (fearing) that they will bite them,
Of strife, and of dogs, big and little; 
Right as the humor of melancholy
Causes very many a man in sleep to cry
For fear of black bears, or black bulls,
Or else black devils will take them.
Of other humors could I tell also
That cause many a man much woe (in) sleep; 
But I will pass over as lightly as I can.
"Lo Cato, who was so wise a man,
Said he not thus, `Attach no importance to dreams'?
"Now sir," said she, "when we fly from the beams,
For God's love, take some laxative.
Upon peril of my soul and of my life,
I counsel you the best -- I will not lie --
That both of choler and of melancholy
You purge yourself; and so that you shall not delay,
Though in this town is no apothecary,
I shall myself guide you to herbs 
That shall be for your health and for your benefit; 
And in our yard I shall find those herbs 
The which by nature have the power
To purge you beneath and also above.
Forget not this, for God's own love!
You are dominated by the choleric humor; 
Beware the sun when it is high in the sky
And do not find yourself with an excess of hot humors.
And if there be an excess, I dare well bet four pence,
That you shall have a fever recurring every three days,
Or an ague that may be your death.
A day or two you shall have digestives
Of worms, before you take your laxatives
Of spurge laurel, centaury, and fumitory,
Or else of hellebore, that grows there,
Of caper-spurge, or of rhamus,
Of ground ivy, growing in our yard, where it is pleasant; 
Peck them up right as they grow and eat them in.
Be merry, husband, for your father's kin!
Dread no dream; I can say you no more."
"Madame," said he, "great thanks for your learning.
But nonetheless, as touching dan Cato,
That has of wisdom such a great renown,
Though he commanded (us) to dread no dreams,
By God, men may in old books read
Of many a man of more authority
Than Cato ever was, as I may prosper,
Who say all the reverse of this sentence,
And have well found by experience
That dreams are significations
As well of joy as of tribulations
That folk endure in this present life.
There need be no argument about this; 
The proof itself shows it in the deed.
"One of the greatest author that men read
Says thus: that once two fellows went
On pilgrimage, with a very good intention,
And it so happened, they came in a town
Where there was such a gathering
Of people, and also such a scantiness of lodging,
That they found not so much as one cottage
In which they both might be lodged.
Therefore they must of necessity,
For that night, part company; 
And each of them goes to his hostelry,
And took his lodging as it would befall.
The one of them was lodged in a stall,
Far in a yard, with oxen of the plough; 
That other man was lodged well enough,
As was his adventure or his fortune,
Which us governs all in common.
"And it so befell that, long before it was day,
This man dreamed in his bed, where he lay,
How his fellow began to call upon him,
And said, `Alas, for in an oxen's stall
This night I shall be murdered where I lie!
Now help me, dear brother, or I die.
In all haste come to me!' he said.
This man out of his sleep for fear awakened suddenly; 
But when he was wakened of his sleep,
He turned himself and took no heed of this.
He thought his dream was nothing but a fantasy.
Thus twice in his sleeping he dreamed; 
And at third time yet his fellow
Came, as it seemed to him, and said, `I am now slain.
Behold my bloody wounds deep and wide!
Arise up early in the morning time,
And at the west gate of the town,' he said,
`A cart full of dung there shalt thou see,
In which my body is hid very secretly; 
Have that same cart immediately seized.
My gold caused my murder, to say the truth,'
And told him in full detail how he was slain,
With a very piteous face, pale of hue.
And trust well, his dream he found very true,
For on the morrow, as soon as it was day,
To his fellow's inn he took the way; 
And when he came to this oxen's stall,
After his fellow he began to call.
"The innkeeper answered him straightway,
And said, `Sir, your fellow is gone.
As soon as it was day he went out of the town.'
"This man began to fall in suspicion,
Remembering his dreams that he dreamed,
And forth he goes -- no longer would he delay --
Unto the west gate of the town, and found
A dung-cart, which went as if it were to dung land,
That was drawn up in that same manner
As you have heard the dead man tell.
And with a hardy heart he began to cry for
Vengeance and justice of this felony:
`My fellow is murdered this same night,
And in this cart he lies gaping upright.
I cry out on the officials,' said he,
`Who should guard and rule this city.
Help! Alas! Here lies my fellow slain!'
What should I more unto this tale say?
The people rushed out and cast the cart to ground,
And in the middle of the dung they found
The dead man, who was just recently murdered.
"O blissful God, that art so just and true,
Lo, how thou always reveal murder!
Murder will out; we see that day by day.
Murder is so disgusting and abominable
To God, who is so just and reasonable,
That He will not suffer it to be hidden,
Though it may wait a year, or two, or three.
Murder will out, this is my conclusion.
And immediately, officials of that town
Have seized the carter and so painfully tortured him,
And also the hosteller so grievously tortured,
That they straightway acknowledged their wickedness,
And were hanged by the neck-bone.
"Here men may seen that dreams are to be feared.
And certainly in the same book I read,
Right in the next chapter after this --
I do not lie, as I may have joy or bliss --
Two men that would have passed over see,
For a certain reason, into a far country,
If that the wind had not been contrary,
That made them to tarry in a city 
That stood very merrily upon an haven-side; 
But on a day, toward the evening time,
The wind began to change, and blew exactly as they desired.
Jolly and glad they went unto their rest,
And they planned to sail very early.
But listen! To that one man befell a great marvel:
The one of them, in sleeping as he lay,
He dreamed a wondrous dream before the day.
He thought a man stood by his bed's side,
And commanded him that he should stay,
And said to him thus: `If thou travel tomorrow,
Thou shalt be drowned; my tale is at an end.'
He woke, and told his fellow what he dreamed,
And prayed him to delay his voyage; 
For that day, he prayed him to wait.
His fellow, that lay by his bed's side,
Began to laugh, and vigorously scorned him.
`No dream,' said he, `may so frighten my heart
That I will desist from doing my tasks.
I set not a straw by (put no value on) thy dreams,
For dreams are but fantasies and foolishness.
Men dream all the time of owls and of apes,
And of many a source of amazement indeed; 
Men dream of a thing that never was nor shall be.
But since I see that thou will remain here,
And thus willfully waste thy tide,
God knows, it makes me sorry; and have good day!'
And thus he took his leave, and went his way.
But before he had sailed half his course,
I know not why, nor what mischance harmed it,
But by chance the ship's bottom broke open,
And ship and man went under the water 
In sight of other ships beside it,
That with them sailed on the same tide.
And therefore, faire Pertelote so dear,
By such old examples thou may learn
That no man should be too heedless
Of dreams; for I say to thee, doubtless,
That many a dream is very greatly to be feared.
"Lo, I read in the life of Saint Kenelm,
That was son of Kenulphus, the noble king
Of Mercia, how Kenelm dreamed a thing.
A little before he was murdered, on a day,
He saw his murder in his vision.
His nurse completely explained to him
His dream, and ordered him to guard himself well
From treason; but he was only seven years old,
And therefore he put little store
In any dream, so holy was his heart.
By God! I had rather than my shirt (give my shirt)
That you had read his legend, as have I.
"Dame Pertelote, I say you truly,
Macrobius, that wrote the vision
In Africa of the worthy Scipio,
Affirms (the value of) dreams, and says that they are
Warnings of things that men later see (come to pass)
And furthermore, I pray you, look well
In the Old Testament, concerning Daniel,
If he held dreams (to be) any foolishness.
Read also of Joseph, and there shall you see
Whether dreams are sometimes -- I say not all --
Warnings of things that shall afterward befall.
Consider the king of Egypt, dan Pharaoh,
His baker and his butler also,
Whether or not they felt any effect in dreams.
Whoever will seek out the histories of various nations
May read many a wonderful thing about dreams.
Lo Croesus, who was king of Lydia,
Dreamed he not that he sat upon a tree,
Which signified he should be hanged?
Lo here Andromacha, Hector's wife,
That day that Hector should lose his life,
She dreamed on the same night before
How the life of Hector should be lost,
If that same day he went into battle.
She warned him, but it might not avail; 
He went to fight nonetheless,
But he was slain straightway by Achilles.
But that same tale is all too long to tell,
And also it is nigh day; I may not delay.
Shortly I say, as for conclusion,
That I shall have of this vision
Adversity; and I say furthermore
That I put no store in laxatives,
For they are poisonous, I know it well; 
I renounce them, I love them not at all!
"Now let us speak of mirth, and stop all this.
Madame Pertelote, as I may have bliss,
Of one thing God has sent me a great favor; 
For when I see the beauty of your face,
You are so scarlet red about your eyes,
It makes all my dread die; 
For as surely as `In the beginning,
`Woman is the ruin of man --'
Madame, the meaning of this Latin is,
`Woman is man's joy and all his bliss.'
For when I feel at night your soft side --
Although I can not on you ride,
Because our perch is made so narrow, alas --
I am so full of joy and of pleasure,
That I renounce both vision and dream."
And with that word he flew down from the beam,
For it was day, and also all his hens,
And with a cluck he began to call them,
Because he had found a seed, which lay in the yard.
Royal he was, he was no longer afraid.
He embraced Pertelote twenty times,
And copulated with her also as often, before it was 6 a.m..
He looks as if he were a grim lion,
And on his toes he roams up and down; 
He deigned not to set his foot to ground.
He clucks when he has found a seed,
And then his wives all run to him.
Thus royal, as a prince is in his hall,
Leave I this Chauntecleer in his feeding place,
And after I will tell his adventure.
When the month in which the world began,
Which is called March, when God first made man,
Was complete, and passed were also,
Since March had gone, thirty days and two,
Befell that Chauntecleer in all his pride,
His seven wives walking by his side,
Cast up his eyes to the bright sun,
That in the sign of Taurus had run
Twenty degrees and one, and somewhat more,
And knew by nature, and by none other knowledge,
That it was prime, and crowed with blissful voice.
"The sun," he said, "has climbed up on heaven
Forty degrees and one, and more indeed.
Madame Pertelote, my world's bliss,
Listen to these blissful birds, how they sing,
And see the fresh flowers, how they spring; 
My heart is full of revel and pleasure!"
But suddenly to him befell a sorrowful situation,
For ever the latter end of joy is woe.
God knows that worldly joy is soon gone; 
And if a rhetorician could fairly compose,
He in a chronicle confidently could write it 
As a supremely important fact.
Now every wise man, let him listen to me; 
This story is as true, I declare,
As is the Book of Lancelot of the Lake,
Which women hold in very great reverence.
Now will I turn again to my subject matter.
A fox, full of sly iniquity,
That in the grove had dwelled three years,
By exalted imagination predestined,
The same night through the hedges broke
Into the yard where the handsome Chauntecleer
Was accustomed, and also his wives, to repair; 
And in a bed of cabbages he lay quietly
Until it had passed 9 a.m. of the day,
Waiting his time on Chauntecleer to fall,
As habitually do all these homicides
That in ambush lie to murder men.
O false murderer, lurking in thy den!
O new Judas Iscariot, new Genylon,
False deceiver, O Greek Synon,
That brought all Troy completely to sorrow!
O Chauntecleer, cursed be that morning
That thou flew from the beams into that yard!
Thou were very well warned by thy dreams
That that same day was perilous to thee; 
But what God knows beforehand must by necessity be,
According to the opinion of certain scholars.
Take witness of him that is a thoroughly competent scholar,
That in the university is great disagreement
In this matter, and great disputation,
And has been (disputed) by a hundred thousand men.
But I can not separate the valid and invalid arguments
As can the holy doctor Augustine,
Or Boethius, or the Bishop Bradwardyn,
Whether God's worthy foreknowledge
Constrains me by need to do a thing --
"Need" I call simple necessity --
Or else, if free choice be granted to me
To do that same thing, or do it not,
Though God knew it before I was born; 
Or if his knowledge constrains not at all
But by conditional necessity. 
I will not have to do with such matter; 
My tale is of a cock, as you may hear,
Who took his counsel from his wife, with sorrow,
To walk in the yard upon that morning
That he had dreamed that dream of which I told you.
Women's counsels are very often fatal; 
Woman's counsel brought us first to woe
And made Adam to go from Paradise,
Where he was very merry and well at ease.
But because I know not to whom it might displease,
If I would blame counsel of women,
Pass over, for I said it as a joke.
Read authors, where they treat of such matter,
And what they say of women you may hear.
These are the cock's words, and not mine; 
I know no harm of any woman divine. 
Fair in the sand, to bathe her merrily,
Lies Pertelote, and all her sisters by her,
In the sunshine, and Chauntecleer so noble
Sang more merrily than the mermaid in the sea
(For Phisiologus says surely
How they sing well and merrily).
And so befell that, as he cast his eye
On a butterfly among the cabbages,
He was aware of this fox, that lay very low.
Not at all then did he want to crow,
But cried straightway, "Cock! cock!" and up he leaped
As one that was frightened in his heart.
For naturally a beast desires to flee
From his natural opponent, if he may see it,
Though he never before had seen it with his eye.
This Chauntecleer, when he did espy him,
He would have fled, but that the fox straightway
Said, "Gentle sir, alas, where will you go?
Are you afraid of me who is your friend?
Now, certainly, I would be worse than a fiend,
If I to you would do harm or villainy!
I am not come to spy on your secrets,
But truly, the cause of my coming
Was only to hear how you sing.
For truly, you have as merry a voice
As has any angel that is in heaven.
Therewith you have in music more feeling
Than had Boethius, or any that knows how to sing.
My lord your father -- God bless his soul! --
And also your mother, of her graciousness,
Have been in my house to my great pleasure; 
And certainly, sir, I would very eagerly please you.
But, insofar as men speak of singing, I will say --
As I may well have use of my two eyes --
Except for you, I heard never man so sing
As did your father in the morning.
Certainly, it came from the heart, all that he sang.
And to make his voice the more strong,
He would so exert himself that with both his eyes
He had to wink, so loud he would cry,
And stand on his tiptoes simultaneously,
And stretch forth his neck long and small.
And also he was of such sound judgment 
That there was no man in any region
That might pass him in song or wisdom.
I have well read in `Dan Burnel the Ass,'
Among his verses, how there was a cock,
Because a priest's son gave him a knock
Upon his leg while he was young and foolish,
He made him lose his benefice.
But certainly, there is no comparison
Between the wisdom and discretion
Of your father and of his subtlety.
Now sing, sir, for Saint Charity; 
Let's see; can you imitate your father?"
This Chauntecleer began to beat his wings,
As one that could not espy his treason,
He was so ravished with his flattery.
Alas, you lords, many a false flatterer
Is in your courts, and many a sycophant,
Who please you well more, by my faith,
Than he who says the truth unto you.
Read Ecclesiastes about flattery; 
Beware, you lords, of their treachery.
This Chauntecleer stood high upon his toes,
Stretching his neck, and held his eyes closed,
And began to crow loud for the occasion.
And dan Russell the fox leaped up at once,
And grabbed Chauntecleer by the throat,
And carried him on his back toward the woods,
For yet there was no one that pursued him.
O destiny, that may not be escaped!
Alas, that Chauntecleer flew from the beams!
Alas, his wife took no heed of dreams!
And on a Friday befell all this misfortune.
O Venus, who art goddess of pleasure,
Since this Chauntecleer was thy servant,
And in thy service did all his power,
More for delight than to people the world,
Why wouldest thou allow him to die on thy day?
O Gaufred, dear supreme master,
Who when thy worthy king Richard was slain
By shot of an arrow, complained his death so grievously,
Why had I not now thy wisdom and thy learning,
To chide the Friday, as you did?
For on a Friday, truly, he was slain.
Then would I show you how that I could complain
For Chanticleer's dread and for his pain.
Certainly, such cry nor lamentation
Was never made by ladies when Ilion (Troy)
Was won, and Pirrus with his drawn sword,
When he had seized king Priam by the beard,
And slain him, as the Aeneid tells us,
As all the hens made in the yard,
When they had seen the sight of Chauntecleer.
But supremely dame Pertelote shrieked
Much louder than did Hasdrubales' wife,
When her husband had lost his life
And the Romans had burned Carthage.
She was so full of torment and of rage
That willfully into the fire she leaped
And burned herself with a steadfast heart.
O woeful hens, exactly so you cried
As when Nero burned the city
Of Rome senators' wives cried 
Because their husbands lost all their lives --
Without guilt this Nero has them slain.
Now will I turn to my tale again.
This poor widow and also her two daughters
Heard these hens cry and make woe,
And out at doors they rush anon,
And see the fox go toward the grove,
And carried the cock away upon his back,
And cried, "Help! Help and alas!
Ha, ha! The fox!" and after him they ran,
And also with staves many another man.
Ran Colle our dog, and Talbot and Gerland,
And Malkyn, with a distaff in her hand; 
Ran cow and calf, and also the very hogs,
So frightened for the barking of the dogs
And shouting of the men and women also
They ran so hard that they thought their hearts would break.
They yelled as fiends do in hell; 
The ducks cried as if men would them kill; 
The geese for fear flew over the trees; 
Out of the hive came the swarm of bees.
So hideous was the noise -- a, bless me! --
Certainly, he Jack Straw and his company
Never made shouts half so shrill
When they would any Fleming kill,
As that same day was made upon the fox.
They brought trumpets of brass, and of box-wood,
Of horn, of bone, in which they blew and puffed,
And with that they shrieked and they whooped.
It seemed as if heaven should fall.
Now, good men, I pray you all to listen:
Lo, how Fortune turns suddenly
The hope and pride also of her enemy!
This cock, that lay upon the fox's back,
In all his dread unto the fox he spoke,
And said, "Sir, if I were you,
Yet should I say, as God may help me,
`Turn again, all you proud churls!
May a true pestilence fall upon you!
Now I am come unto the wood's side; 
Despite all you could do, the cock shall here remain.
I will eat him, in faith, and that right away!'"
The fox answered, "In faith, it shall be done."
And as he spoke that word, all suddenly
This cock nimbly broke from his mouth,
And high upon a tree he quickly flew.
And when the fox saw that the cock was gone,
"Alas!" said he, "O Chauntecleer, alas!
I have to you," said he, "done offense,
In as much as I made you afraid
When I seized you and brought you out of the yard.
But, sir, I did it with no wicked intention.
Come down, and I shall tell you what I meant; 
I shall say the truth to you, as God may help me!"
"Nay then," said he, "I curse both of us two.
And first I curse myself, both blood and bones,
If thou trick me more often than once.
Thou shalt no more through thy flattery
Make me sing and close my eyes; 
For he that closes his eyes, when he should see,
All willfully, God let him never prosper!"
"Nay," said the fox, "but God give him misfortune,
Who is so indiscreet of governance
That he chatters when he should hold his peace."
Lo, such it is to be careless
And negligent, and trust on flattery.
But you who hold this tale a folly,
As of a fox, or of a cock and hen,
Take the morality, good men.
For Saint Paul says that all that is written,
Is written for our instruction, indeed; 
Take the fruit, and let the chaff be still.
Now, good God, if it be thy will,
As says my lord, make us all good men,
And bring us to his high bliss! Amen.
["Sir Nun's Priest," our Host said straightway,
"Blessed be thy buttocks, and every testicle!
This was a merry tale of Chanticleer.
But by my troth, if thou were a layman,
Thou would be an excellent copulator of fouls (rooster).
For if thou have as much desire as thou hast might,
Thou would have need of hens, as I think,
Yea, more than seven times seventeen.
See, what muscles has this gentle priest,
So big a neck, and such a large chest!
He looks like a sparrow-hauk with his eyes;
He needs not paint his complexion
With red dye nor with grain of Portugal.
Now, sir, may good fortune come to you for your tale!"
And after that he, with a very merry manner,
Said unto another, as you shall hear.]
Once there was dwelling in my country
An archdeacon, a man of high rank,
That boldly carried out the law
In punishment of fornication,
Of witchcraft, and also of pandering,
Of defamation of character, and adultery,
Of robbing churches, and of wills,
Of marriage contracts and of failure to take the sacraments,
Of usury, and of simony also.
But certainly, to lechers did he the greatest woe;
They had to sing out in pain if they were taken;
And those who paid less than full tithes were severely punished,
If any parson would complain about them.
There could escape him no monetary punishment (fine).
For small tithes and for small offering
He made the people piteously to sing out in pain,
For ere the bishop caught them with his crozier,
They were in the archdeacon's book.
Then had he, throughout his jurisdiction,
Power to have them punished.
He had a summoner ready at his hand;
No one in England was a more clever rascal;
For deviously he had his network of spies,
That showed him well where there might be profit for him.
He could spare one or two of the lechers,
To direct him to four and twenty more.
For though this Summoner were mad as a hare,
To tell his wickedness I will not desist;
For we are exempt from his authority.
They have over us no jurisdiction,
Nor never shall, until the end of all their lives.
"By St. Peter! so are women of the brothels,"
Said the Summoner, "put out of our jurisdiction!"
"Quiet! with bad luck and with misfortune to you!"
Thus said our Host, "and let him tell his tale.
Now tell forth, though the Summoner loudly complain;
And tell everything, my own master dear."
This false thief, this summoner, said the Friar,
Had always pimps as ready to his hand,
As any hawk to come to the lure in England,
Who told him all the secrets that they knew,
For their acquaintance was not come recently.
They were secretly his agents.
He got himself a great profit in this way;
His master knew not always what he earned.
Without an actual summons an ignorant man
He could summon, on pain of excommunication,
And they were glad to fill his purse
And make him great feasts at the ale-house.
And just as Judas had small amounts of the apostles' money,
And was a thief, exactly such a thief was he;
His master had but half the amount due to him.
He was, if I shall give him his due praise,
A thief, and also a summoner, and a pimp.
He had also wenches in his employ,
That, whether sir Robert or sir Huwe,
Or Jakke, or Rauf, or whoever it was
That lay by them, they told it in his ear.
Thus were the wench and he in agreement,
And he would fetch a forged court order,
And summon both of them to the archdeacon's court,
And rob the man, and let the wench go.
Then would he say, "Friend, I shall for thy sake
Have her stricken out of our records;
Thou need trouble thyself no more in this case.
I am thy friend, where I can help thee."
Certainly he knew of more ways of stealing
Than is possible to tell in two years.
For in this world is no hunting dog
That can know a hurt deer from a whole one
Better than this summoner knew a sly lecher,
Or an adulterer, or a concubine.
And because that was the best part of all his income,
Therefore on it he set all his intention.
And it so befell that once on a day
This summoner, ever lying in ambush for his prey,
Rode to summon an old widow, an old crone,
Pretending to have a case against her, for he wanted a bribe.
And it happened that he saw before him ride
A gay yeoman, alongside the edge of a forest.
A bow he bore, and arrows bright and keen;
He had upon him a short jacket of green,
A hat upon his head with fringes black.
"Sir," said this summoner, "hail, and well met!"
"Welcome," said he, "and every good fellow!
Where ridest thou, alongside this green wood?"
Said this yeoman, "Wilt thou travel far today?"
This summoner him answered and said, "Nay;
Here close by," said he, "is my intention
To ride, to collect a rent
That belongs to my lord's due income."
"Art thou then a bailiff?" "Yes," said he.
He dared not, for the true filth and shame
Of the name, say that he was a summoner.
"By God," said this yeoman, "dear brother,
Thou art a bailiff, and I am another.
I am unknown in this country;
Of thine acquaintance I would pray thee,
And also of brotherhood, if you wish.
I have gold and silver in my chest;
If thou happen to come in our shire,
All shall be thine, just as thou wilt desire."
"Great thanks," said this summoner, "by my faith!"
Each in other's hand pledges his troth,
To be sworn brothers until they die.
In pleasant conversation they ride forth and amuse themselves.
This summoner, who was as full of idle speech
As full of venom are these butcherbirds
And ever inquiring about every thing,
"Brother," said he, "where is now your dwelling
If I should seek you another day?"
This yeoman him answered in gentle words,
"Brother," said he, "far in the north country,
Where I hope some time I shall thee see.
Ere we depart, I shall thee so well instruct
That thou shalt never miss my house."
"Now, brother," said this summoner, "I you pray,
Teach me, while we ride by the way,
Since you are a bailiff as am I,
Some trickery, and tell me faithfully
In my occupation how I may most profit;
And spare not for conscience nor sin,
But as my brother tell me, how you do your business."
"Now, by my troth, brother dear," said he,
"I shall tell thee a true tale,
My wages are very scanty and very small.
My lord is hard to me and niggardly,
And my job is very hard work,
And therefore by extortions I live.
For truly, I take all that men will me give.
In every way, by trickery or by violence,
From year to year I earn all my expenses.
I can no better tell, truthfully."
"Now certainly," said this Summoner, "I do the same.
I do not desist from taking anything, God knows,
Unless it be too heavy or too hot.
What I can get in private secretly,
No sort of pangs of conscience for that have I.
Were it not for my extortion, I could not live,
Nor of such tricks will I be confessed.
Stomach (compassion) nor conscience know I none;
I curse these confessors every one.
Well are we met, by God and by Saint James!
But, dear brother, tell me then thy name,"
Said this summoner. Meanwhile
This yeoman began a little to smile.
"Brother," said he, "wilt thou that I thee tell?
I am a fiend; my dwelling is in hell,
And here I ride about on my acquisition of profits,
To know whether men will give me any thing.
What I acquire is the total of all my income.
Look how thou ridest for the same purpose,
To make a profit, thou carest never how;
Right so do I, for I would ride now
Unto the world's end for a prey."
"Ah!" said this summoner, "bless me! What say you?
I supposed you were truly a yeoman.
You have a man's shape as well as I;
Have you then a definite form
In hell, where you are in your usual condition?"
"Nay, certainly," said he, "there have we none;
But when we like we can take us one,
Or else make it seem to you we are so shaped;
Sometimes like a man, or like an ape,
Or like an angel can I ride or walk about.
It is no wonderful thing though it be so;
A lousy conjurer can deceive thee,
And by God, yet I know more craft than he."
"Why," said this summoner, "ride you then or walk about
In various shapes, and not always in one?"
"Because we," said he, "will make us such forms
As are most suitable for taking our prey."
"What makes you to have all this labor?"
"Very many a cause, dear sir summoner,"
Said this fiend, "but every thing has its time.
The day is short, and it is past nine a.m.,
And yet I gained nothing in this day.
I will concentrate on profit, if I may,
And not attend to explaining our mental abilities.
For, brother mine, thy wit is all too bare
To understand, even though I told them to thee.
But, since thou askest why labor we --
For sometimes we are God's instruments
And means to do his commandments,
When he wishes, upon his creatures,
In various methods and in various appearances.
Without him we have no power, certainly,
If he wishes to stand against us.
And sometimes, at our prayer, have we leave
Only the body and not the soul to grieve;
Take the evidence of Job, to whom we did woe.
And sometimes have we power over both of the two --
This is to say, of soul and body as well.
And sometimes we are allowed to harass
A man and do his soul distress
And not his body, and all is for the best.
When he withstands our temptation,
It is a cause of his salvation,
Although it was not our intention
He should be saved, but that we wanted to seize him.
And sometimes we are servants unto a man,
As to the archbishop Saint Dunstan,
And to the apostles I was also a servant."
"Yet tell me," said the summoner, "truly,
Do you make yourself new bodies thus always
Of elements?" The fiend answered, "Nay.
Sometime we dissemble, and sometimes we arise
With dead bodies, in very many manners,
And speak as readily and faire and well
As to the Phitonissa (Witch of Endor) did Samuel.
(And yet will some men say it was not he;
I put no store in your theology.)
But one thing I warn thee, I will not deceive you:
Thou want especially to know how we are shaped;
Thou shalt hereafter, my brother dear,
Come where thou need not to learn from me,
For thou shalt, by thine own experience,
Be able in a professorial chair to lecture on this subject
Better than Virgil, while he was alive,
Or Dante also. Now let us ride quickly,
For I will hold company with thee
Until it be that thou forsake me."
"Nay," said this summoner, "that shall not happen!
I am a yeoman, as is very widely known;
My troth will I keep, in this case.
For though thou were the devil Satan,
My troth will I hold to my brother,
As I am sworn, and each of us to the other,
To be true brother in this case;
And we both go about our acquisitions.
Take thou thy part, whatever men will thee give,
And I shall mine; thus may we both live.
And if one of us have more than the other,
Let him be true and share it with his brother."
"I grant," said the devil, "by my faith."
And with that word they ride forth their way.
And right at the entrance of the town,
To which this summoner planned to go
They saw a cart that was loaded with hay,
Which a carter drove forth in his way.
Deep in mud was the road, for which the cart stood still.
The carter smote and cried as if he were crazy,
"Giddap, Brok! Giddap, Scot! Why do you stop pulling for the stones?
The fiend," said he, "fetch you, body and bones,
As surely as ever you were born,
So much woe as I have with you suffered!
The devil have all, both horses and cart and hay!"
This summoner said, "Here shall we have some fun."
And nearer the fiend he drew, as if it were nothing,
Very discreetly, and whispered in his ear:
"Hearken, my brother, hearken, by thy faith!
Hearest thou not what the carter says?
Seize it at once, for he has given it to thee,
Both hay and cart, and also his three horses."
"Nay," said the devil, "God knows, never a bit!
It is not his intention, trust me well.
Ask him thyself, if thou not believe me;
Or else wait a while, and thou shalt see."
This carter whacks his horses upon the hindquarters,
And they began to pull and to stoop.
"Giddap! Now," said he, "may Jesus Christ you bless,
And all his handiwork, both more and less!
That was well pulled, my own dappled boy.
I pray God save thee, and Saint Loy!
Now is my cart out of the mud, by God!"
"Lo, brother," said the fiend, "what told I thee?
Here may you see, my own dear brother,
The churl spoke one thing, but he thought another.
Let us go forth on our undertaking;
Here gain I nothing from a tax on horse and cart."
When they came a short way out of town,
This summoner to his brother began to whisper:
"Brother," said he, "here dwells an old crone
Who would be almost as willing to lose her neck
As to give up a penny of her goods.
I will have twelve pence, even if she be driven mad,
Or I will summon her unto our court;
And yet, God knows, of her know I no vice.
But since thou can not, in this country,
Earn thy living, learn here by my example."
This summoner knocks at the widow's gate.
"Come out," said he, "thou old hag!
I believe thou hast some friar or priest with thee."
"Who knocks?" said this wife, "bless me!
God save you, sir, what is your sweet will?"
"I have," said he, "here a writ of summons;
Upon pain of excommunication, look that thou be
Tomorrow morning before the archdeacon's knee
To answer to the court about certain things."
"Now, Lord," said she, "Christ Jesus, king of kings,
Surely help me, since I can not.
I have been sick, and that full many a day.
I can not walk so far," said she, "nor ride,
Without being dead, it so pains in my side.
May I not ask for a written copy of the charge, sir summoner,
And answer there by my representative
To such thing as men will bring against me?"
"Yes," said this summoner, "pay at once -- let's see --
Twelve pens to me, and I will thee acquit.
I shall have no profit thereby but little;
My master has the profit and not I.
Hurry up, and let me ride hastily;
Give me twelve pens, I can no longer tarry."
"Twelve pence!" said she, "Now, lady Saint Marie
Surely help me out of care and sin,
Though I should gain this wide world (if I had it),
I have not twelve pence within my possession.
You know well that I am poor and old;
Show your charity on me, poor wretch."
"Nay then," said he, "the foul fiend me fetch
If I excuse thee, though thou should be dead!"
"Alas!" said she, "God knows, I have no guilt."
"Pay me," said he, "or by the sweet Saint Anne,
I will carry off thy new pan
For debt which thou owest me since long ago.
When thou madest thine husband cuckold,
I paid at our court the fine for thy punishment."
"Thou lie!" said she, "by my salvation,
I was never ere now, widow nor wife,
Summoned unto your court in all my life;
Nor was I ever anything but true of my body!
Unto the devil black and rough of appearance
Give I thy body and my pan also!"
And when the devil heard her so curse
Upon her knees, he said in this manner,
"Now, Mabely, my own mother dear,
Is this your will in earnest that you say?"
"The devil," said she, "so fetch him ere he die,
And pan and all, unless he will repent!"
"Nay, old slut, that is not my intention,"
Said this summoner, "to repent
For any thing that I have had of thee.
I would I had thy smock and every bit of your clothing!"
"Now, brother," said the devil, "be not angry;
Thy body and this pan are mine by right.
Thou shalt go with me to hell yet tonight,
Where thou shalt know of our secrets
More than a Master of Divinity."
And with that word this foul fiend seized him;
Body and soul he with the devil went
Where summoners have their heritage.
And God, that made after his image
Mankind, save and guide us, one and all,
And grant that these summoners become good men!
Gentlemen, I could have told you, said this Friar,
Had I had been given time by this Summoner here,
According to the text of Christ, Paul, and John,
And of our other doctors of the Church many a one,
Such pains that your hearts might tremble,
Even though no tongue can describe it,
Though I could for a thousand years tell
The pains of that cursed house of hell.
But to keep us from that cursed place,
Keep vigil and pray Jesus for his grace
To protect us from the tempter Satan.
Hearken this word! Beware, as in this case:
"The lion sits in his ambush always
To slay the innocent, if he can."
Dispose always your hearts to withstand
The fiend, who would make you thrall and enslaved.
He may not tempt you beyond your power,
For Christ will be your champion and knight.
And pray that these summoners themselves repent
Of their misdeeds, ere the fiend seize them!
"Squire, come nearer, if it be your will,
And say something about love, for certainly you
Know as much about that as any man."
"Nay, sir," said he, "but I will speak as I can
With a hearty will, for I will not rebel
Against your desire; a tale I will tell.
Have me excused if I speak amiss;
My will is good, and lo, my tale is this."
At Sarray, in the land of Tartars,
There dwelt a king who waged war on Russia,
Through which there died many a doughty man.
This noble king was called Cambyuskan,
Who in his time was of such great renown
That there was nowhere in any region
So excellent a lord in all things:
He lacked nothing that is appropriate to a king.
In accord with the religion in which he was born
He kept its law, to which he was sworn;
And moreover he was hardy, wise, and rich,
And compassionate and just, always impartial;
Truthful of his word, benign, and honorable;
Of his heart as stable as the center of any circle;
Young, vigorous, and strong, in arms as desirous (to excel)
As any young knight of all his household.
He was a handsome person and fortunate,
And always so well maintained the splendor appropriate to his rank
That there was nowhere such another man.
This noble king, this Tartar Cambyuskan,
Had two sons on Elpheta his wife,
Of whom the eldest was called Algarsyf;
That other son was called Cambalo.
A daughter had this worthy king also,
That youngest was, and was called Canacee.
But to tell you all her beauty,
It lies not in my tongue, nor in my abilities;
I dare not undertake so high a thing.
My English also is insufficient.
He must be an excellent rhetorician
Who knows his figures of speech appropriate to that art,
If he should describe her in every detail.
I am none such, I must speak as I can.
And it so befell that when this Cambyuskan
Has twenty winters borne his diadem,
As he was accustomed from year to year, I suppose,
He had the feast of his nativity
Proclaimed throughout Sarray his city,
Exactly March 15, in the ordinary course of the year.
Phoebus the sun full jolly was and clear,
For he was near his position of greatest power
In Mars' face and in his astrological house
In Aries, the choleric hot sign.
Full pleasant was the weather and mild,
For which the fowls, in response to the bright sun,
What for the season and the young greenery,
Full loudly sang of their desires.
They seemed to have gotten themselves protections
Against the sword of winter, keen and cold.
This Cambyuskan, of whom I have you told,
In royal vestments sits on his dais,
With diadem, full nobly in his palace,
And holds his feast so solemn and so rich
That in this world there was none like it;
Of which if I should tell all the festivities,
Then would it occupy a summer's day,
And also it is not necessary to describe
At every course the order of their service.
I will not tell of their strange stews,
Nor of their swans, nor of their young herons.
Also in that land, as old knights tell,
There is some food that is considered very delicious
That in this land is reckoned of but little value;
There is no man that can report all.
I will not tarry you, for it is nine a.m.
And because it is not essential to the tale but a loss of time;
Unto my first topic I will return.
And so it befell that after the third course,
While this king sits thus in his nobility,
Listening to his minstrels playing their instruments
Before him at the table delightfully,
In at the hall door all suddenly
There came a knight upon a steed of brass,
And in his hand a broad mirror of glass.
Upon his thumb he had of gold a ring,
And by his side a naked sword hanging;
And up he rides to the high table.
In all the hall there was not spoken a word
For marveling at this knight; him to behold
Full intently they gaze, young and old.
This strange knight, who came thus suddenly,
All armed, except his head, full richly,
Salutes king and queen and all the lords,
In the order in which they sat in the hall,
With such high reverence and respect,
As well in speech as in countenance,
That Gawain, with his old courtesy,
Though he were come again out of Fairyland,
Could not amend one word of his speech.
And after this, before the high table,
He with a manly voice said his message,
In accordance with the form used in his language,
Without one mistake of syllable or of letter;
And in order that his tale should seem the better,
Conforming to his words was his facial expression,
As teaches the art of speech to those who learn it.
Although I can not imitate his style,
Nor can not climb over so high a stile,
Yet say I this, as to his general meaning:
Thus much amounts all that ever he meant (to say),
If it so be that I have it (correctly) in mind.
He said, "The king of Araby and of India,
My liege lord, on this solemn day
Salutes you, as he best knows how and can,
And sends you, in honor of your feast,
By me, who am all ready to obey your command,
This steed of brass, that easily and well
Can in the space of one natural day --
This is to say, in four and twenty hours --
Where-ever you desire, in drought or else showers,
Bear your body into every place
To which your heart wishes to go,
Without harm to you, through foul or fair;
Or, if you desire to fly as high in the air
As does an eagle when he desires to soar,
This same steed shall bear you ever more,
Without harm, until you be where you wished,
Though you sleep or rest on his back,
And return again with twisting of a peg.
He who made it knew full many an ingenious contrivance.
He observed many a configuration of the stars
Before he had finished this operation,
And knew full many a magical seal and many a controlling force.
"This mirror also, that I have in my hand,
Has such a power that men can in it see
When there shall befall any adversity
Unto your reign or to yourself also,
And clearly who is your friend or foe.
"And in addition to all this, if any fair lady
Has set her heart on any sort of creature,
If he be false, she shall his treason see,
His new love, and all his trickery,
So clearly that there shall no thing be hidden.
For this reason, (to protect) against this amorous spring time,
This mirror and this ring, that you can see,
He has sent to my lady Canacee,
Your excellent daughter that is here.
"The power of the ring, if you will hear,
Is this: that if she wishes to wear it
Upon her thumb or bear it in her purse,
There is no fowl that flies under the heaven
That she shall not well understand his speech,
And know his meaning openly and plain,
And answer him in his language in reply;
And every herb that grows upon root
She shall also know, and to whom it will provide a remedy,
Although his wounds be ever so deep and wide.
"This naked sword, that hangs by my side,
Such power has that whatever man you smite
Throughout his armor it will carve and bite,
Were it as thick as is a branched oak;
And whatever man that is wounded by the stroke
Shall never be whole until you please, out of kindness,
To stroke him with the flat side in that same place
Where he is hurt; this is as much to say,
You must with the blunt side of the sword again
Stroke him in the wound, and it will close.
This is a very truth, without lying;
It fails not while it is in your possesion."
And when this knight has thus his tale told,
He rides out of hall and down he alit.
His steed, which shone like the bright sun,
Stands in the court, still as any stone.
This knight is to his chamber led straightway,
And is unarmed, and set to dinner.
The presents are full royally fetched --
This is to say, the sword and the mirror --
And carried straightway into the high tower
By certain officers appointed for this purpose;
And unto Canacee this ring is carried
Solemnly, where she sits at the table.
But truly, without any lie,
The horse of brass, that can not be moved,
It stands as if it were glued to the ground.
No man there can drive it out of the place
Despite any contrivance of windlass or pulley;
And the reason why? Because they do not know the craft.
And therefore in the place they have it left
Until the knight has taught them the manner
To remove him, as you shall later hear.
Great was the crowd that swarms to and fro
To stare on this horse that stands so,
For it
So well proportioned to be strong,
Exactly as if it were a steed of Lombardy;
In
As if it were a noble Apulian courser.
For certainly, from his tail unto his ear
Nature nor art could him not amend
To any extent, as all the people believed.
But evermore their greatest wonder was
How it could move, and yet was of brass;
It was from fairyland, as it seemed to the people.
Diverse folk diversely they deemed;
As many heads, as many opinions there are.
They murmured as does a swarm of bees,
And made arguments according to their fantasies,
Retelling these old poems,
And said it was like the Pegasus,
The hors that had wings in order to fly;
Or else it was Sinon the Greek's horse,
That brought Troy to destruction,
As men in these old romances read.
"My heart," said one, "is evermore in dread;
I believe some men of arms are in there,
That prepare themselves to conquer this city.
It would be very good if all such things were known."
Another whispered to his fellow quietly,
And said, "He lies, for it is rather like
An illusion made by some magic,
Such as conjurers play at these great feasts."
Of various conjectures thus they chatter and debate,
As ignorant people speculate commonly
Of things that are made more subtly
Than they in their ignorance can comprehend;
They habitually suppose the worse.
And some of them wondered about the mirror,
That was carried up into the principal tower,
How men might in it see such things.
Another answered and said it might well be
Naturally, by arrangements
Of angles and of ingenious reflections,
And said that in Rome was such a one.
They speak of Alocen, and Vitulon,
And Aristotle, that wrote while they lived
Of intricate mirrors and of optical lenses,
As know they who have heard their books (read aloud).
And other folk have wondered on the sword
That would pierce throughout every thing,
And fell in speech of Thelophus the king,
And of Achilles with his magical spear,
For he could with it both heal and harm,
Exactly in such a way as men may do with the sword
Of which right now you have yourselves heard.
They speak of various ways of hardening of metal,
And speak of chemicals moreover,
And how and when it should be hardened,
Which is unknown, at least unto me.
Then they speak of Canacee's ring,
And all said that such a wondrous thing
Of the craft of making rings they never heard anything,
Save that he Moses and king Solomon
Had a reputation for cunning in such art.
Thus say the people and draw themselves aside.
But nonetheless some said that it was
Wondrous to make glass out of ashes of fern,
And yet glass is not like ashes of fern;
But, because they have known it so long,
Therefore ceases their chattering and their wonder.
As intensely some wonder about the cause of thunder,
About ebb tide, about flood tide, about spider webs, and about mist,
And all things, until the cause is known.
Thus they chatter, and conjecture, and speculate
Until the king did from the table arise.
Phebus (the sun) has left the noon-time angle,
And yet ascending was the beast royal,
The noble Lion, with his star Aldiran,
When this Tarter king, Cambyuskan,
Rose from his table, where he sat full high.
Before him goes the loud music
Until he came to his chamber of tapestries (Presence Chamber),
Where they sound diverse instruments
That it is like a heaven to hear.
Now dance lusty Venus's children dear,
For in the Fish (Pisces) their lady sat full high,
And looks on them with a friendly eye.
This noble king is set upon his throne.
This foreign knight is fetched to him right away,
And on the dance he goes with Canacee.
Here is the revel and the jollity
That a dull-witted man is not able to describe.
He must have known love and its service
And be a convivial man as gay as May,
That should describe for you such splendor.
Who could tell you the form of dances
So strange, and such cheerful countenances,
Such subtle looking and dissimulations
For dread of jealous men's perceptions?
No man but Launcelot, and he is dead.
Therefore I pass over all this pleasure;
I say no more, but in this jollity
I leave them until people go to the supper.
The steward ordered the spiced cakes to be brought quickly,
And also the wine, amid all this music.
The ushers and the squires are gone,
The spiced cakes and the wine are come quickly.
They eat and drink, and when this had an end,
Unto the temple, as was reasonable, they wend.
The service done, they sup all day long.
What need is there to tell you their splendor?
Each man knows well that a king's feast
Has plenty for the highest ranks and for the lowest,
And dainties more than are in my knowing.
At after-supper goes this noble king
To see this horse of brass, with all in a crowd
Of lords and of ladies about him.
Such wondering was there about this horse of brass
That since the great siege of Troy was,
Where men wondered about a horse also,
Nor was there such a wondering as was then.
But finally the king asks this knight
About the power of this courser and the might,
And prayed him to tell how to control him.
This horse at once began to trip and dance,
When this knight laid hand upon his rein,
And said, "Sir, there is no more to say,
But, when you desire to ride anywhere,
You must turn a peg, which stands in his ear,
Which I shall you tell between us two(secretly).
You must name him to what place also,
Or to what country, that you want to ride.
And when you come where you desire to abide,
Bid him descend, and turn another peg,
For therein lies the essence of working the device,
And he will down descend and do your will,
And in that place he will abide still.
Though all the world the contrary had sworn,
He shall not thence be drawn nor carried away.
Or, if you wish to bid him go thence,
Turn this peg, and he will vanish at once
Out of the sight of every sort of creature,
And come again, be it by day or night,
When you wish to call him again
In such a manner as I shall to you say
Between you and me, and that very soon.
Ride when you wish; there is nothing more to do."
When the king was informed by that knight,
And has correctly understood
The manner and the form of all this matter,
Full glad and blithe, this noble doughty king
Returns to his revel as before.
The bridle is carried unto the tower
And kept among his jewels precious and dear.
The horse vanished, I know not in what manner,
Out of their sight; you get no more from me.
But thus I leave in pleasure and jollity
This Cambyuskan entertaining his lords
Until well nigh the day began to spring.
The nurse of digestion, the sleep,
Did on them wink (as a signal) and bad them take notice
That much drink and activity make rest necessary;
And with a yawning mouth he kissed them all,
And said that it was time to lie down,
For blood (the humor) was in its domination.
"Cherish blood, nature's friend," said he.
They thank him yawning, by two, by three,
And every creature did draw himself to his rest,
As sleep them bad; they took it for the best.
Their dreams shall not now be told for me;
Their heads were full of fumes from drinking wine,
That causes dreams of which there is no significance.
They sleep until it was nine a.m.,
The most part, except for Canacee.
She was very temperate, as women are;
For of her father had she taken leave
To go to rest soon after it was evening.
She did not wish to be grown pale,
Nor in the morning to appear unfestive,
And slept her first sleep, and then awoke.
For such a joy she in her heart took
Both of her strange ring and her mirror,
That twenty times she changed her color;
And in her sleep, directly because of the mental impression
Made by her mirror, she had a vision.
Therefore, before the sun did glide upward,
She called on her governess who was beside her,
And said that she wished to rise.
These old women who are customarily wise,
As is her governess, answered her at once,
And said, "Madame, whither do you wish to go
Thus early, for the folk are all in bed?"
"I want," said she, "to arise -- for I desire
No longer to sleep -- and walk about."
Her governess calls a great crowd of women,
And up they rise, a good ten or twelve;
Up rises fresh Canacee herself,
As ruddy and bright(ly shining) as does the young sun,
That in the Ram is four degrees up run --
No higher was he when she was ready --
And forth she walks at an easy pace,
Clothed, in accord with the lusty season sweet,
Lightly, to amuse herself and walk on foot,
With no more than five or six of her entourage;
And in a path forth in the park goes she.
The vapor that glided up from the earth
Made the sun seem ruddy and broad;
But nonetheless it was so fair a sight
That it made all their hearts to lighten,
What for the season and the dawning,
And for the fowls that she heard sing.
For right away she knew what they meant
Exactly by their song, and knew all their meaning.
The main point for which every tale is told,
If it is delayed until the desire (to hear it) is cold
Of those who have listened to it for a long time,
The taste (for it) passes away more and more,
Because of the overabundance of its prolixity;
And by the same reason, it seems to me,
I should proceed to the main point,
And quickly put an end to her walking.
In a tree, for dryness as white as chalk,
As Canacee was amusing herself in her walk,
There sat a falcon over her head full high,
That with a pitiful voice so did cry
That all the wood resounded with her cry.
She had beaten herself so pitifully
With both her wings until the red blood
Ran down the length of the tree in which she stood.
And continually she cried always and shrieked,
And with her beak herself she so stabbed
That there is no tiger, nor any beast so cruel
That dwells either in wood or in forest,
That would not have wept, if he could weep,
For sorrow of her, she shrieked always so loud.
For there was never yet no man alive,
If I could well describe a falcon,
That heard of its equal in beauty,
As well in plumage as in nobility
In shape, in all that might reckoned be.
A peregrine falcon then seemed she
From foreign land; and repeatedly, as she stood,
She swoons every now and then for lack of blood,
Until well nigh is she fallen from the tree.
This fair king's daughter, Canacee,
That on her finger bore the strange ring,
Through which she well understood every thing
That any fowl may in his language say,
And could answer him in his language in return,
Has understood what this falcon said,
And well nigh for the pity she almost died.
And to the tree she goes full hastily,
And on this falcon looks compassionately,
And spread wide her skirt, for well she knew
The falcon must fall from the branch,
When it swooned next, for lack of blood.
A long while to await her she stood
Until at the last she spoke in this manner
Unto the hawk, as you shall after hear:
"What is the cause, if it may be told,
That you be in this pain such as the Furies suffer in hell?"
Said Canacee unto this hawk above.
"Is this for sorrow of death or loss of love?
For, as I believe, these are the two causes
That most cause woe to a gentle heart;
Of other harm there is no need to speak.
For you avenge yourself upon yourself,
Which proves well that either anger or fear
Must be the reason for your cruel deed,
Since I see no other creature hunt you.
For love of God, spare yourself,
Or what can be your help? For west nor east
I saw never ere now no bird nor beast
That treated himself so piteously.
You slay me with your sorrow truly,
I have of you such great compassion.
For God's love, come down from the tree;
And as I am a king's daughter true,
If that I truly knew the cause
Of your malady, if it lay in my power,
I would amend it ere it were night,
So help me great God of nature!
And herbs shall I in abundance find
With which to heal your hurts quickly."
Then shrieked this falcon yet more pitifully
Than ever she did, and fell to ground straightway,
And lies in a swoon, dead and like a stone,
Until Canacee has in her lap her taken
Until the time she awoke from the swoon.
And after she started up from her swoon,
Right in her hawk's language thus she said:
"That pity runs soon in a gentle heart,
Feeling its counterpart in sharp pains,
Is proven every day, as men may it see,
As well by deeds as by written authority;
For a gentle heart makes known its noble character.
I see well that you have of my distress
Compassion, my faire Canacee,
Out of true womanly goodness
That Nature in your natural disposition has set.
But for no hope to fare the better,
But to obey unto your heart noble,
And to make others be warned by my example,
As by the whelp chastised is the lion,
Right for that cause and to that conclusion,
While that I have the time and the opportunity,
My harm I will reveal ere I go away."
And ever, while that one her sorrow told,
That other wept as she would turn to water
Until the falcon prayed her to be still,
And, with a sigh, right thus she spoke her mind:
"Where I was bred -- alas, that same day! --
And fostered on a cliff of marble gray
So tenderly that no thing ailed me,
I knew not what was adversity
Until I could fly full high under the sky.
Then dwelt a male falcon very near me,
That seemed an exemplar of all nobility;
Although he was full of treason and falseness,
It was so concealed under humble bearing,
And under the appearance of truth in such a manner,
Under pleasantness, and under careful attentiveness,
That no creature could have supposed he could feign,
So deeply in a fast dye he dyed his true colors.
Just as a serpent hides himself under flowers
Until he can see his time to bite,
Just so this god of love's hypocrite
So does his ceremonies and obeisances,
And keeps in outward appearance all his observances
That are in accord with nobility in love.
As in a tomb all the beauty is above,
And under is the corpse, as you know,
Such was this hypocrite, in every circumstance.
And in this manner he served his own purpose
So that, except for the fiend, no one knew what he meant,
Until he so long had wept and complained,
And many a year his service to me feigned,
Until my heart, too compassionate and too naive,
Entirely ignorant of his consummate malice,
Very frightened that he might die, as it seemed to me,
Upon receiving his oaths and his pledges,
Granted him love, upon this condition,
That evermore my honor and renown
Were safe, both in private and in public (in all ways);
This is to say, that according to his deserts,
I gave him all my heart and all my thought --
God knows and he, I would not have agreed on any other terms --
And took his heart in exchange for mine for ever.
But truly it is said, since many a day gone by,
`An honest creature and a thief think not alike.'
And when he saw the business so far advanced
That I had granted him fully my love
In such a manner as I have said above,
And gave him my true heart as freely
As he swore he gave his heart to me,
Immediately this tiger, full of treachery,
Fell on his knees with such devout humility,
With such high reverence, and, as seemed by his appearance,
So like a gentle lover in his manners,
So ravished, as it seemed, for the joy
That never Jason nor Paris of Troy --
Jason? certainly, nor any other man
Since Lameth was, he who first of all began
To love two, as folk wrote long ago --
Nor ever, since the first man was born,
Could (any) man, by (so much as) one twenty thousandth,
Reproduce the deceptive sophisms of his art,
Nor were worthy to unbuckle his galosh,
Where duplicity or feigning were concerned,
Nor so could thank a creature as he did to me!
His manner was a heaven to see
For any woman, were she never so wise,
So painted he and made himself elegant in every way,
Both his words and his countenance.
And I so loved him for his obeisance,
And for the truth I believed was in his heart,
That if it so were that any thing pained him,
Although it were never so little, and I knew of it,
It seemed to me I felt death twist my heart.
And shortly, this business had gone forth so far
That my will was his will's instrument;
This is to say, my will obeyed his will
In all things, so far as was consonant with reason,
Keeping ever the limits set by my honor.
Nor never loved anyone more, or even as much
As him, God knows, nor never shall again.
"This lasted longer than a year or two,
That I supposed of him nothing but good.
But finally, thus at the last it stood,
That Fortune would have it that he must depart
Out of that place where I was.
Whether I was woeful, there is no question;
I can not make a description of it.
For one thing I dare tell boldly:
By this experience I know what is the pain of death;
Such harm I felt because he could not remain.
So one day he took his leave of me,
So sorrowfully also that I believed truly
That he had felt as much harm as I,
When I heard him speak and saw his appearance.
But nevertheless, I thought he was so true,
And also that he should return again
Within a little while, to say the truth;
And it was reasonable also that he must go
For his honor, as often it happens so,
So that I made virtue of necessity,
And took it well, since it had to be.
As I best could, I hid from him my sorrow,
And took him by the hand, with Saint John as my guarantor,
And said to him thus: `Lo, I am all yours;
Be to me such as I to you have been and shall be.'
What he answered, it needs not be repeated;
Who can speak better than he, who can act worse?
When he has said everything well, then he has done (all he will do).
`Therefore she must have a very long spoon
Who shall eat with a fiend,' thus I have heard said.
So at the last he had to go forth on his way,
And forth he speeds until he came where he pleased.
When he decided to rest,
I believe he had that text in mind,
That `every thing, by returning to its natural state,
Makes himself happy;' thus say men, as I suppose.
Men, because of their nature, love novelty,
As do birds that men feed in cages.
For though thou take care of them night and day,
And strew their cages with straw fair and soft as silk,
And give them sugar, honey, bread and milk,
Yet just as soon as his door is left open
He with his feet will kick down his cup,
And to the wood he will go and eat worms;
They are so fond of novelty in their food,
And love novelties because of their nature,
No nobility of blood can restrain them.
"So fared this falcon, alas the day!
Though he was of noble birth, and fresh and gay,
And goodly to look upon and humble and generous,
He saw upon a time a kite (scavenger bird) fly by,
And suddenly he so loved this kite
That all his love is completely gone from me,
And has turned his truth false in this manner.
Thus has the kite my lover in her service,
And I am lost, without remedy!"
And with that word this falcon did cry out
And swooned again in Canacee's lap.
Great was the sorrow for the hawk's harm
That Canacee and all her women made;
They knew not how they might cheer up the falcon.
But Canacee carries her home enfolded in her gown,
And softly did wrap her in bandages,
Where she with her beak had hurt herself.
Now Canacee can do nothing but dig herbs
Out of the ground, and make new salves
Of herbs, precious and delicate in color,
With which to heal this hawk. From dawn to nighttime
She devotes her efforts and all her power,
And by her bed's head she made a pen
And covered it with velvet cloths, blue
As a sign of truth that is in women seen.
And on all the outside, the pen is painted green,
In which were painted all these false fowls,
Such as are these small birds, falcons, and owls;
For sheer scorn were painted beside them,
Magpies, to cry out against them and chide them.
Thus I leave Canacee keeping her hawk;
I will for now speak no more of her ring
Until it becomes again appropriate to tell
How this falcon got back her love,
Repentant, as the story tells us,
By the mediation of Cambalus,
The king's son, of whom I told you.
But henceforth I will keep to my narrative
To speak of adventures and of battles
That never yet were heard such great marvels.
First will I tell you of Cambyuskan,
That in his time many a city won;
And after I will speak of Algarsif,
How he won Theodora to his wife,
For whom full often in great peril he was,
Had he not been helped by the steed of brass;
And next I will speak of Cambalo,
That fought in lists with the brethren two
For Canacee ere he could win her.
And where I left off I will again begin.
Appollo whirls up his chariot so high
To that house of the god Mercury, the sly --
"In faith, Squire, thou hast well acquitted thyself.
And nobly. I praise well thy intelligence,"
Said the Franklin, "considering thy youth,
With such feeling thou speakest, sir, I praise thee!
In my opinion, there is no one that is here
That shall be thy equal in eloquence,
If thou live; God give thee good luck,
And in virtue send thee perseverance,
For I take great pleasure in thy speech.
I have a son, and by the Trinity,
I had rather than have twenty pound's worth of land,
Though it right now were fallen in my hand,
That he were a man of such discretion
As you are! Fie on possessions,
Unless a man is virtuous as well!
I have rebuked my son, and shall again,
Because he has no desire to devote himself to virtue;
But to play at dice, and to spend
And lose all that he has is his usage.
And he would rather talk with a serving boy
Than converse with any noble person
From whom he might learn true nobility."
"Straw for your nobility!" said our Host.
"What, Franklin! By God, sir, well thou knowest
That each of you must tell at the least
A tale or two, or break his promise."
"That know I well, sir," said the Franklin.
"I pray you, hold me not in disdain,
Though to this man I speak a word or two."
"Tell on thy tale without more words."
"Gladly, sir Host," said he, "I will obey
Unto your will; now hearken what I say.
I will not offend you in any way
So far as my mental abilities will suffice.
I pray to God that it may please you;
Then I will know well that it is good enough."
The Cook of London, while the Reeve spoke,
Was so happy he thought the Reeve scratched him on the back.
"Ha! ha!" said he, "For Christ's passion,
This miller had a sharp conclusion
To his logical argument about lodging!
Well said Salomon in his language,
`Do not bring every man into thy house,'
For providing lodging by night is perilous.
Well ought a man to take heed
Whom he brings into his private home.
I pray to God, give me sorrow and care
If ever, since I was called Roger of Ware,
I heard a miller better set to work (tricked).
He had a malicious trick played on him in the dark.
But God forbid that we stop here;
And therefore, if you agree to hear
A tale by me, who am a poor man,
I will tell you, as well as ever I can,
A little amusing affair that happened in our city."
Our Host answered and said, "I grant it to thee.
Now tell on, Roger; look that it be good,
For of many a pastry hast thou drawn out the gravy,
And many a Jack of Dover (a kind of pie) hast thou sold
That has been twice hot and twice cold.
Of many a pilgrim hast thou Christ's curse,
For of thy parsley yet they fare the worse,
Which they have eaten with thy stubble-fed goose,
For in thy shop is many a fly loose.
Now tell on, gentle Roger by thy name.
But yet I pray thee, be not angry about a joke;
A man may speak very truthfully in joking and play."
"Thou sayest the truth," said Roger, "by my faith!
But `a true jest is a bad jest,' as the Fleming says.
And therefore, Harry Bailly, by thy faith,
Be thou not angry, ere we depart here,
Even though my tale is of an inn-keeper.
But nonetheless I will not tell it yet;
But before we part, indeed, thou shalt be repaid."
And with that he laughed and made good cheer,
And told his tale, as you shall next hear. 
A apprentice once dwelt in our city,
And of a craft of food merchants was he.
Gaily dressed he was as is a goldfinch in the woods,
Brown as a berry, a good-looking short fellow,
With locks black, combed full elegantly.
He could dance so well and jollily
That he was called Perkin Reveler.
He was as full of love and womanizing
As is the hive full of honey sweet;
Happy was the wench who with him might meet.
At every wedding party he would sing and dance;
He loved the tavern better than the shop.
For when there was any procession in Cheapside,
Out of the shop thither would he leap --
Until that he had all the sight seen,
And danced well, he would not come back--
And gathered him a company of his sort
To dance and sing and make such merriment;
And there they agreed on a time to meet,
To play at dice in such and such a street.
For in the town there was no apprentice
That could better throw a pair of dice
Than Perkin could, and thereto he was free
In his spending, in a private place.
That found his master easily in his business accounts,
For many times he found his cash box completely bare.
For surely (in the case of) an revelling apprentice
Who makes a practice of dicing, debauchery, or womanizing,
His master shall pay for it in his shop,
Even though he has no share of the entertainment (for which he pays).
For theft and debauchery, they are interchangeable.
Even though he knows how to play on guitar or fiddle.
Revelling and honesty, in one of low degree,
Are always incompatible, as anyone can see.
This jolly apprentice with his master remained,
Until he was nearly out of his apprenticeship,
Although he was rebuked both early and late,
And sometimes taken (as a prisoner) with music to Newgate prison.
But at the last his master remembered,
Upon a day, when Perkin sought his certificate of release,
A proverb that says this same word:
"Well better is a rotten apple out of the store
Than that it rot al the remnant."
So fares it with a debauched servant;
It is much less harm to let him go away,
Than that he should ruin all the servants in the place.
Therefore his master gave him his certificate,
And ordered him to go, with sorrow and with bad luck!
And thus this jolly apprentice had his leave.
Now let him revel all the night or leave off (do as he chooses).
And because there is no thief without an accomplice,
Who helps him to waste and to consume
That which he can steal or may borrow,
Right away he sent his bed and his clothing
Unto a companion of his own sort,
Who loved dicing, and revelling, and having fun,
And had a wife that kept for the sake of appearances
A shop, and screwed for her living.
Our Host began to swear as if he was crazy;
"Alas!" said he, "by (Christ's) nails and by (His) blood!
This was a false churl and a false judge.
As shameful a death as heart can devise
Come to these judges and their advocates!
At any rate, this innocent maid is slain, alas!
Alas, too dearly she paid for her beauty!
Therefore I say that every day men may see
That gifts of Fortune and of Nature
Are cause of death to many a creature.
Her beauty was her death, I dare well say.
Alas, so pitifully as she was slain!
Of both gifts that I speak of now
Men have very often more harm than benefit.
But truly, mine own master dear,
This is a pitiful tale to hear.
But nonetheless, pass over; is does not matter.
I pray to God so save thy gentle body,
And also thy vessels for analyzing urine and thy flasks,
Thine ipocras, and also thy galiones (medicines),
And every container full of thy electuaries;
God bless them, and our lady Saint Mary!
As I may prosper, thou art a proper man,
And like a prelate, by Saint Ronyan!
Said I not well? I can not speak in technical terms;
But well I know thou makes mine heart to grieve so,
That I almost have caught a palpitation of the heart.
By corpus' bones! unless I have medicine,
Or else a draught of fresh and strong ale,
Or unless I hear right now a merry tale,
My heart is lost for pity of this maid.
Thou fair friend (rascal), thou Pardoner," he said,
"Tell us some mirth or comic tales right away."
"It shall be done," said he, "by Saint Ronyon!
But first," said he, "here at this ale stake (tavern sign)
I will both drink and eat of a cake."
But right away these gentlefolk began to cry,
"Nay, let him tell us of no ribaldry!
Tell us some moral thing, that we may learn
Some useful knowledge, and then will we gladly hear."
"I agree, indeed," said he, "but I must think
About some respectable thing while I drink."
"Gentlemen," he said, "in churches when I preach,
I take pains to have a loud voice,
And ring it out as round as goes a belle,
For I know all by rote that I tell.
My theme is always the same, and ever was --
'Greed is the root of all evil.'
"First I pronounce from whence I come,
And then my papal bulls I show, each and every one.
Our liege lord's seal on my letter of authorization,
I show that first, to protect my body,
So that no man be so bold, neither priest nor clerk,
To hinder me from (doing) Christ's holy work.
And after that then I tell forth my tales;
Indulgences of popes and of cardinals,
Of patriarchs and bishops I show,
And in Latin I speak a few words,
With which to add spice to my preaching,
And to stir them to devotion.
Then I show forth my long crystal stones,
Crammed full of rags and of bones --
Relics they are, as suppose they each one.
Then I have mounted in latten (brass-like alloy) a shoulder-bone
Which was of a holy Jew's sheep.
`Good men,' I say, `take heed of my words;
If this bone be washed in any well,
If cow, or calf, or sheep, or ox swell
That any worm has eaten, or worm stung,
Take water of that well and wash its tongue,
And it is whole right away; and furthermore,
Of pocks and of scab, and every sore
Every sheep shall be whole that of this well
Drinks a draft. Take heed also what I say:
If the householder who owns the beasts
Will every week, before the cock crows,
Fasting, drink of this well a draft,
As that same holy Jew taught our elders,
His beasts and his possessions shall multiply.
`And, sirs, it also heals jealousy;
For though a man be fallen in jealous rage,
Have his potage made with this water,
And he shall never more mistrust his wife,
Though he knew the truth of her misdeed,
Although she had taken two or three priests.
`Here is a mitten also, that you may see.
He that will put his hand in this mitten,
He shall have multiplying of his grain,
When he has sown, be it wheat or oats,
Providing that he offer pennies, or else fourpences.
`Good men and women, one thing I warn you:
If any person be in this church now
Who has done such horrible sin, that he 
Dare not, for shame, be confessed of it,
Or any woman, be she young or old,
Who has made her husband cuckold,
Such folk shall have no power nor no grace
To offer to my relics in this place.
And whoever finds himself out of such blame,
He will come up and offer in God's name,
And I will absolve him by the authority
Which by papal bull was granted to me.'
"By this trick have I won, year after year,
An hundred marks since I was pardoner.
I stand like a clerk in my pulpit,
And when the ignorant people are set down,
I preach as you have heard before
And tell a hundred more false tales.
Then I take pains to stretch forth the neck,
And east and west upon the people I nod,
As does a dove sitting on a barn.
My hands and my tongue go so quickly
That it is joy to see my business.
Of avarice and of such cursedness
Is all my preaching, to make them generous
To give their pennies, and namely unto me.
For my intention is only to make a profit,
And not at all for correction of sin.
I care not a bit, when they are buried,
Though their souls go picking blackberries! 
For certainly, many a sermon
Comes often times from an evil intention;
Some for pleasure of folk and flattery,
To be advanced by hypocrisy,
And some for vain glory, and some for hate.
For when I dare debate no other ways,
Then I will sting him with my sharp tongue
In preaching, so that he shall not escape
To be defamed falsely, if he
Has trespassed to my brethren or to me.
For though I tell not his proper name,
Men shall well know that it is the same,
By signs, and by other details.
Thus I repay folk who make trouble for us pardoners;
Thus I spit out my venom under hue
Of holinesses, to seem holy and true.
"But shortly my intention I will tell:
I preach of nothing but for greed.
Therefore my theme is yet, and ever was,
`Greed is the root of all evil.'
Thus I can preach against that same vice
Which I use, and that is avarice.
But though myself be guilty of that sin,
Yet I can make other folk to turn away
From avarice and bitterly to repent.
But that is not my principal intention;
I preach nothing but for greed.
Concerning this matter this ought to be enough.
"Then I tell them illustrative tales many a one
Of old stories from long time ago.
For ignorant people love old tales;
Such things they can well repeat and hold in memory. 
What, do you suppose, that while I can preach,
And win gold and silver because I teach,
That I will live in poverty voluntarily?
Nay, nay, I never thought it, truly!
For I will preach and beg in various lands;
I will not do any labor with my hands,
Nor make baskets and live thereby,
Because I will not beg idly.
I will imitate none of the apostles;
I will have money, wool, cheese, and wheat,
Although it were given by the poorest servant boy,
Or by the poorest widow in a village,
Even though her children should die of hunger.
Nay, I will drink liquor of the vine
And have a pretty wench in every town.
But listen, gentlemen, in conclusion:
Your desire is that I shall tell a tale.
Now I have drunk a draft of strong ale,
By God, I hope I shall tell you a thing
That shall, for good reason, be to your liking.
For though myself be a very vicious man,
Yet I can tell you a moral tale,
Which I am accustomed to preach in order to profit.
Now hold your peace! My tale I will begin."
In Flanders once was a company
Of young folk who practiced folly,
Such as debauchery, gambling, brothels, and taverns,
Where with harps, lutes, and guitars,
They dance and play at dice both day and night,
And also eat and drink beyond their capacity,
Through which they do the devil sacrifice
Within that devil's temple in cursed manner
By abominable excess.
Their oaths are so great and so damnable
That it is grisly to hear them swear.
Our blessed Lord's body they tore in pieces --
They thought that the Jews did not tear him enough --
And each of them laughed at the other's sin.
And right away then come dancing girls
Elegantly shaped and slim, and girls selling fruits,
Singers with harps, bawds, girls selling wafers,
Which are the very devil's officers
To kindle and blow the fire of lechery,
That is joined unto gluttony.
The Bible I take as my witness
That lechery is in wine and drunkenness.
Lo, how that drunken Lot, unnaturally,
Lay by his two daughters, unwittingly;
So drunk he was, he knew not what he did.
Herod, whoever should seek well the histories (would learn),
When he was filled with wine at his feast,
Right at his own table he gave his command
To slay John the Baptist, full guiltless.
Seneca says a good word, doubtless;
He says he can find no difference 
Between a man that is out of his mind
And a man that is drunk,
Except that madness, fallen in an evil person,
Lasts longer than does drunkenness.
O gluttony, full of cursedness!
O first cause of our ruin!
O origin of our damnation,
Until Christ had bought us with his blood again!
Lo, how dearly, shortly to say,
Was bought that same cursed villainy!
Corrupt was all this world for gluttony.
Adam our fader, and his wife also,
From Paradise to labor and to woe
Were driven for that vice, there is no doubt.
For while Adam fasted, as I read,
He was in Paradise; and when he
Ate of the forbidden fruit on the tree,
Immediately he was cast out to woe and pain.
O gluttony, on thee well we ought to complain!
O, if a man knew how many evils
Follow of excess and of gluttony,
He would be the more moderate
Of his diet, sitting at his table.
Alas, the short throat, the tender mouth,
Makes that east and west and north and south,
In earth, in air, in water, men work
To get a glutton dainty food and drink!
Of this matter, O Paul, well can thou treat
"Food unto belly, and belly also unto food,
God shall destroy both," as Paul says.
Alas, a foul thing it is, by my faith,
To say this word, and fouler is the deed,
When man so drinks of the white and red
That he makes his privy of his throat 
Through that same cursed excess.
The apostle weeping says full piteously,
"There walk many of whom I have told you --
I say it now weeping, with piteous voice --
They are enemies of Christ's cross,
Of which the end is death; belly is their god!"
O gut! O belly! O stinking bag,
Filled with dung and with corruption!
At either end of thee the sound is foul.
How great labor and cost it is to feed thee!
These cooks, how they pound, and strain, and grind,
And turn substance into outward appearance
To fulfill all thy gluttonous desire!
Out of the hard bones they knock 
The marrow, for they throw nothing away
That may go through the gullet softly and sweetly.
Of seasonings of leaf, and bark, and root
Shall his sauce be made for delight,
To make him yet a newer appetite.
But, certainly, he who habitually seeks such delicacies
Is dead, while he lives in those vices.
A lecherous thing is wine, and drunkenness
Is full of striving and of wretchedness.
O drunken man, disfigured is thy face,
Sour is thy breath, foul art thou to embrace,
And through thy drunken nose the sound seems 
As though thou said always "Sampson, Sampson!"
And yet, God knows, Sampson never drank any wine.
Thou fallest like a stuck pig;
Thy tongue is lost, and all thy care for decency,
For drunkenness is truly the sepulcher
Of man's wit and his discretion.
In whom drink has domination
He can keep no secrets; there is no doubt.
Now guard yourself from the white and from the red,
And namely from the white wine of Lepe
That is for sale in Fishstreet or in Cheapside.
This wine of Spain creeps subtly
Into other wines, growing near by,
Of which there rise such bodily vapors
That when a man has drunk three drafts,
And supposes that he is at home in Cheapside,
He is in Spain, right at the town of Lepe --
Not at La Rochelle, nor at Bordeaux town --
And then will he say "Sampson, Sampson!"
But listen, gentlemen, one word, I pray you,
That all the great deeds, I dare say,
Of victories in the Old Testament,
Through true God, who is omnipotent,
Were done in abstinence and in prayer.
Look in the Bible, and there you can learn it.
Consider how Attila, the great conqueror,
Died in his sleep, with shame and dishonor,
Bleeding ever at his nose in drunkenness.
A captain should live in sobriety.
And beyond all this, consider right well
What was commanded unto Lamuel --
Not Samuel, but Lamuel, I say;
Read the Bible, and find it explicitly
About giving wine to those that have the duty of doing justice.
No more of this, for it may well suffice.
And now that I have spoken of gluttony,
Now I will forbid you gambling.
Dicing is the true mother of lies,
And of deceit, and cursed perjuries,
Blasphemy of Christ, manslaughter, and waste also
Of possessions and of time; and furthermore,
It is a disgrace and contrary to honor
To be considered a common dice player.
And ever the higher he is of estate,
The more is he considered abandoned (to shame).
If a prince plays at dicing,
In all governance and policy
He is, by common opinion,
Held the less in reputation.
Stilboun, who was a wise ambassador,
Was sent to Corinth in very great honor
From Sparta to make their alliance.
And when he came, it happened, by chance,
That all the greatest men that were of that land,
Playing at dice he found them.
For which, as soon as it could be,
He stole home again to his country,
And said, "There I will not lose my reputation,
Nor will I take on me so great infamy,
To ally you unto any dice-players.
Send other wise ambassadors;
For, by my troth, I would rather die
Than I should ally you to dice-players.
For you, that are so glorious in honors,
Shall not ally yourselves with dice-players
By my will, nor by my negotiation."
This wise philosopher, thus said he.
Consider also that to the king Demetrius
The king of Parthia, as the book tells us,
Sent him a pair of dice of gold in scorn,
Because he had played at dicing before that;
For which he held his glory or his renown
At no value or esteem.
Lords may find other sorts of play
Respectable enough to pass the time.
Now will I speak of oaths false and great
A word or two, as old books treat them.
Great swearing is an abominable thing,
And false swearing is yet more worthy of reproof.
The high God forbad swearing at al,
Witness on Matthew; but in special
Of swearing says the holy Jeremiah,
"Thou shall swear truly thine oaths, and not lie,
And in judgement and also in righteousness";
But idle swearing is a cursed thing.
Behold and see that in the first three
Of high God's honorable commandments,
How the second of his commands is this:
"Take not my name in vain nor amiss."
Lo, he forbids such swearing rather
Than homicide or many a cursed thing;
I say that, so far as order is concerned, thus it stands;
He who understands his commandments knows this,
How that is the second command of God.
And furthermore, I will tell thee flatly
That vengeance shall not part from his house
Who of his oaths is too excessive.
"By God's precious heart," and "By his nails,"
And "By the blood of Christ that is in Hales Abbey,
Seven is my number, and thine is five and three!"
"By God's arms, if thou falsely play,
This dagger shall go throughout thy heart!" --
This fruit comes of the two cursed dice,
Perjury, anger, falseness, homicide.
Now, for the love of Christ, who for us died,
Leave your oaths, both great and small.
But, sirs, now will I tell forth my tale.
These three rioters of whom I tell,
Long before prime rang of any bell,
Had set themselves in a tavern to drink,
And as they sat, they heard a bell clink
Before a corpse, which was carried to its grave.
The one of them did call to his servant:
"Go quickly," he said, "and ask at once
What corpse is this that passes by here;
And see that thou report his name correctly."
"Sir," said this boy, "that is not at all necessary;
It was told me two hours before you came here.
He was, indeed, an old fellow of yours,
And suddenly he was slain last night,
Completely drunk, as he sat on his bench upright.
There came a stealthy thief men call Death,
Who slays all the people in this country,
And with his spear he struck his heart in two,
And went his way without more words.
He has slain a thousand (during) this pestilence.
And, master, before you come in his presence,
It seems to me that it would be necessary
To beware of such an adversary.
Always be ready to meet him;
Thus taught me my mother; I say no more."
"By Saint Mary!" said this tavern-keeper,
"The child says truth, for he has slain this year,
Over a mile from here, within a great village,
Both man and woman, child, and laborer, and servant boy;
I suppose his habitation is there.
It would be great wisdom to be forewarned,
Before he did a man any harm."
"Yea, God's arms!" said this rioter,
"Is it such peril to meet with him?
I shall seek him by path-way and also by street (everywhere),
I make a vow to God's honorable bones!
Listen, fellows, we three are all agreed;
Let each of us hold up his hand to other,
And each of us become the others' brother,
And we will slay this false traitor Death.
He shall be slain, he who slays so many,
By God's dignity, before it be night!"
Together have these three pledged their troths
To live and die each of them for other,
As though he were his own born brother.
And up they leaped, all drunken in this rage,
And forth they go towards that village
Of which the tavern-keeper had spoken before.
And many a grisly oath then have they sworn,
And Christ's blessed body they tore to pieces --
Death shall be dead, if they can catch him!
When they have gone not fully half a mile,
Right as they would have stepped over a fence,
An old and poor man met with them.
This old man full meekly greeted them,
And said thus, "Now, lords, may God look after you!"
The proudest of these three rioters
Answered in reply, "What, churl, bad luck to you!
Why art thou all wrapped up except for thy face?
Why live thou so long in such old age?"
This old man did look in his face,
And said thus: "Because I can not find
A man, though I walked to India,
Neither in city nor in any village,
That would change his youth for my age;
And therefore I must have my age still,
As long a time as it is God's will.
Nor Death, alas, will not have my life.
Thus I walk, like a restless wretch,
And on the ground, which is my mother's gate,
I knock with my staff, both early and late,
And say `Dear mother, let me in!
Lo how I waste away, flesh, and blood, and skin!
Alas, when shall my bones be at rest?
Mother, with you would I exchange my strongbox
That in my chamber long time has been,
Yea, for an hair shirt to wrap me!'
But yet to me she will not do that favor,
For which full pale and withered is my face.
"But, sirs, to you it is no courtesy
To speak rudeness to an old man,
Unless he trespass in word or else in deed.
In Holy Writ you may yourself well read:
`In the presence of an old man, gray upon his head,
You should rise;' therefore I give you advice,
Do no harm now unto an old man,
No more than you would want men to do to you
In old age, if you live so long.
And God be with you, wherever you walk or ride!
I must go thither where I have to go."
"Nay, old churl, by God, thou shall not so,"
Said this other dice-player quickly;
"Thou depart not so quickly, by Saint John!
Thou spoke right now of that same traitor Death.
That slays all our friends in this country.
Have here my pledge, as thou art his spy,
Tell where he is or thou shall pay for it,
By God and by the holy sacrament!
For truly thou art in league with him
To slay us young folk, thou false thief!"
"Now, sirs," said he, "if you are so eager
To find Death, turn up this crooked way,
For in that grove I left him, by my faith,
Under a tree, and there he will wait;
He will not in any way hide himself because of your boast.
Do you see that oak? Right there you shall find him.
God save you, He who redeemed mankind,
And amend you!" Thus said this old man;
And every one of these rioters ran
Until he came to that tree, and there they found
Of fine round florins of coined gold
Well nigh eight bushels, as they thought.
No longer then after Death they sought,
But each of them was so glad of that sight,
Because the florins are so faire and bright,
That they set themselves down by this precious hoard.
The worst of them, he spoke the first word.
"Brethren," he said, "take heed of what I say;
My wit is great, though I jest and play.
Fortune has given this treasure unto us 
In mirth and jollity to live our life,
And as easily as it comes, so will we spend it.
Ah, God's precious dignity! Who would have supposed
To-day that we should have such good fortune?
But if this gold could be carried from this place
Home to my house, or else unto yours --
For well you know that all this gold is ours --
Then we would be in great happiness.
But truly, it may not be (done) by day.
Men would say that we were arrant thieves,
And for our own treasure have us hanged.
This treasure must be carried by night
As wisely and as slyly as it can be.
Wherefore I advise that among us all straws
Be drawn, and let's see where the lot will fall;
And he who has the shortest straw with happy heart 
Shall run to the town, and that very quickly,
And very secretly bring us bread and wine.
And two of us shall carefully guard
This treasure well; and if he will not tarry,
When it is night, we will carry this treasure,
By mutual agreement, where we think best."
That one of them brought the straws in his fist,
And commanded them to draw and see where it will fall;
And it fell on the youngest of them all,
And forth toward the town he went right away.
And as soon as he was gone,
The one of them spoke thus unto that other:
"Thou knowest well thou art my sworn brother;
Thy profit will I tell thee straightway.
Thou knowest well that our fellow is gone.
And here is gold, and that a full great quantity,
That shall be divided among us three.
But nevertheless, if I can arrange things so
That it were divided among us two,
Had I not done a good turn to thee?"
That other answered, "I know not how that can be.
He knows that the gold is with us two;
What shall we do? What shall we say to him?"
"Shall it be (our) secret plan?" said the first scoundrel,
"And I shall tell in a few words 
What we shall do, and bring it well about."
"I agree," said that other, "without doubt,
That, by my troth, I will not betray thee."
"Now," said the first, "thou knowest well we are two,
And two of us shall be stronger than one.
Look, when he has set down, right away 
Arise as though thou would with him play,
And I shall stab him through the two sides 
While thou struggle with him as in game,
And with thy dagger see that thou do the same;
And then shall all this gold be divided,
My dear friend, between me and thee.
Then we both can fulfill all our desires,
And play at dice just as we wish,"
And thus these two scoundrels are agreed
To slay the third, as you have heard me say.
This youngest, who went to the town,
Very often in heart he rolls up and down
The beauty of these florins new and bright.
"O Lord!" he said, "if it would be that I might
Have all this treasure to myself alone,
There is no man that lives under the throne
Of God that should live so merrily as I!"
And at the last the fiend, our enemy,
Put in his thought that he should buy poison,
With which he might slay his two fellows;
Because the fiend found him in such a manner of living
That he had leave bring him to sorrow.
For this was utterly his full intention,
To slay them both and never to repent.
And forth he goes, no longer would he tarry,
Into the town, unto an apothecary,
And prayed him that he would sell him 
Some poison, that he might kill his rats;
And also there was a polecat in his yard,
That, as he said, had slain his capons,
And he would gladly revenge himself, if he could,
On vermin that ruined him by night.
The apothecary answered, "And thou shall have
A thing that, as God may save my soul,
In all this world there is no creature
That has eaten or drunk of this concoction
Only so much as the amount of a seed of wheat,
That he shall not immediately lose his life;
Yea, he shall die, and that in less time
Than thou will go at a walk but only a mile,
This poison is so strong and violent."
This cursed man has in his hand taken 
This poison in a box, and then he ran
Into the next street unto a man,
And borrowed [of] him three large bottles,
And in the two he poured his poison;
The third he kept clean for his drink.
For all the night he intended to work
In carrying of the gold out of that place.
And when this rioter, bad luck to him,
Had filled his three big bottles with wine,
He goes back again to his fellows.
What needs it to preach of it more?
For right as they had planned his death before,
Right so they have him slain, and that immediately.
And when this was done, thus spoke that one:
"Now let us sit and drink, and make us merry,
And afterward we will bury his body."
And with that word it happened to him, by chance,
To take the bottle where the poison was,
And drank, and gave his fellow drink also,
For which straightway they died, both of the two.
But certainly, I suppose that Avicenna
Wrote never in any authoritative book, nor in any chapter,
More wondrous symptoms of poisoning
Than had these two wretches, before their ending.
Thus ended are these two homicides,
And also the false poisoner as well.
O cursed sin of all cursedness!
O treacherous homicide, O wickedness!
O gluttony, lechery, and dicing!
Thou blasphemer of Christ with churlish speech
And great oaths, out of habit and out of pride!
Alas, mankind, how may it happen
That to thy creator, who made thee
And with his precious heart's blood redeemed thee,
Thou art so false and so unnatural, alas?
Now, good men, God forgive you your trespass,
And guard yourselves from the sin of avarice!
My holy pardon can cure you all,
Providing that you offer gold coins or silver pennies,
Or else silver brooches, spoons, rings.
Bow your head under this holy papal bull!
Come up, you wives, offer some of your wool!
Your names I enter here in my roll immediately;
Into the bliss of heaven you shall go.
I absolve you, by my high power,
You who will offer, as clean and also as clear (of sin)
As you were born. -- And lo, sirs, thus I preach.
And Jesus Christ, that is our souls' physician,
So grant you to receive his pardon,
For that is best; I will not deceive you.
But, sirs, one word I forgot in my tale:
I have relics and pardons in my bag,
As fine as any man in England,
Which were given to me by the pope's hand.
If any of you will, of devotion,
Offer and have my absolution,
Come forth straightway, and kneel down here,
And meekly receive my pardon;
Or else take pardon as you travel,
All new and fresh at every mile's end,
Providing that you offer, again and again,
Gold coins or silver pennies, which are good and true.
It is an honor to every one that is here
That you may have a pardoner with sufficient power
To absolve you in the countryside as you ride,
For accidents that may happen.
Perhaps there may fall one or two
Down off his horse and break his neck in two.
Look what a safeguard is it to you all
That I happen to be in your fellowship,
Who can absolve you, both more and less (every one),
When the soul shall from the body pass.
I advise that our Host here shall begin,
For he is most enveloped in sin.
Come forth, sir Host, and offer first right now,
And thou shall kiss the relics every one,
Yea, for a fourpence coin! Unbuckle thy purse right now."
"Nay, nay!" he said, "then I will have Christ's curse!
Let it be," he said, "it shall not be, as I may prosper!
Thou would make me kiss thine old underpants,
And swear it was a relic of a saint,
Though it were stained by thy fundament!
But, by the cross that Saint Helen found,
I would I had thy testicles in my hand
Instead of relics or a container for relics.
Have them cut off, I will help thee carry them;
They shall be enshrined in a hog's turd!"
This Pardoner answered not a word;
So angry he was, no word would he say.
"Now," said our Host, "I will no longer joke
With thee, nor with any other angry man."
But immediately the worthy Knight began,
When he saw that all the people laughed,
"No more of this, for it is right enough!
Sir Pardoner, be glad and merry of cheer;
And you, sir Host, who are so dear to me,
I pray you that you kiss the Pardoner.
And Pardoner, I pray thee, draw thyself nearer,
And, as we did, let us laugh and play."
At once they kissed, and rode forth their way.
When folk had laughed at this foolish business
Of Absolon and clever Nicholas,
Different folk said different opinions,
But for the most part they laughed and enjoyed themselves.
And at this tale I saw no man aggrieved,
Except for only Osewold the Reeve.
Because he was of the carpenter's craft,
A little anger is left in his heart;
He began to grouch, and criticized it a little.
"As I may prosper," said he, "very well could I repay thee
With (a tale of the) blearing of a proud miller's eye (tricking him),
If I wanted to speak of ribaldry.
But I am old; because of age I do not want to play;
Grass time is done; my fodder is now dry straw;
This white head reveals my old years;
My heart is as moldy as my hairs,
Unless I fare as does the fruit of the medlar --
That same fruit continually grows worse,
Until it is rotten in rubbish or in straw.
We old men, I fear, fare like that:
Until we are rotten, we can not be ripe;
We dance always while the world will pipe.
For in our will there sticks ever a nail,
To have a white head and a green tail,
As a leek has; for though our power is gone,
Our will desires folly continually.
For when we can not do anything, then will we talk about it;
Yet in our old ashes fire is raked over (covered).
"Four live coals have we, which I shall describe --
Boasting, lying, anger, greed;
These four little sparks belong to old age.
Our old limbs may well be feeble,
But desire shall not be lacking, that is truth.
And yet I have always a young man's desires,
As many years as have passed hence
Since my tap of life began to run.
For surely, when I was born, immediately
Death turned on the spigot of life and let it flow,
And ever since the tap has so run
Until the barrel is almost all empty.
The stream of life now drops on the rim.
The foolish tongue may well ring and chime
About wretchedness that passed long ago;
With old folk, save dotage, there is no more!"
When our Host had heard this sermon making,
He began to speak as lordly as a king.
He said, "What amounts all this wit?
What! shall we speak all day of holy writ?
The devil made a reeve to preach,
Or of a cobbler made a shipman or a physician.
Say forth thy tale, and do not waste the time.
Lo Deptford, and it is almost seven thirty!
Lo Greenwich, in which is many a rascal!
It is well time to begin thy tale."
"Now, sires," said this Osewold the Reeve,
"I pray yow all that you not be displeased,
Though I answer (him), and somewhat make a fool of him; 
For it is permissable to repel force with force.
"This drunk Miller has told us here
How a carpenter was tricked,
Perhaps in scorn, for I am one.
And, by your leave, I shall repay him right now;
Right in his churl's terms will I speak.
I pray to God his neck may break into pieces;
He can well in my eye see a piece of straw,
But in his own he can not see a large piece of timber."
At Trumpington, not far from Cambridge,
There goes a brook, and over that a bridge,
Upon the which brook there stands a mill;
And this is absolute truth that I tell you:
A miller was there dwelling many a day.
As any peacock he was proud and gay.
He could play the bagpipe and fish, and mend nets,
And play a drinking game, and well wrestle and shoot;
Always by his belt he carried a long cutlass,
And very sharp was the blade of the sword.
An elegant dagger he carried in his pouch;
There was no man, for peril, dared touch him.
A Sheffield knife he carried in his hose.
Round was his face, and he had a pug nose;
As bald as an ape was his skull.
He was a quarrelsome bully in every way.
There dared no person lay hand upon him,
That he did not swear he should pay for it right away.
A thief he was, in truth, of grain and meal,
And that a sly one, and accustomed to steal.
His name was called haughty Symkyn.
A wife he had, come of noble kin;
The parson of the town was her father.
With her he gave very many a pan of brass,
So that Symkyn should be allied with his family.
She was fostered in a nunnery;
For Symkyn would have no wife, as he said,
Unless she were well educated and a virgin,
To preserve his state of yeomanry.
And she was proud, and brazen as is a magpie.
A very fair sight was it to look upon those two;
On holidays before her would he go
With the tip of his hood wound about his head,
And she came after in a gown of red;
And Symkyn had hose of the same color.
There dared no one call her anything but "lady";
There was no one so brave that went by the way
That dared flirt with her or once play,
Unless he wished to be slain by Symkyn
With cutlass, or with knife, or dagger.
For jealous folk are dangerous always --
At least they would like their wives to think so.
And also, because she was a bit besmirched (by her illegitimacy),
She was as haughty as water in a ditch,
And full of disdain and of scorn.
She thought that a lady should be aloof,
Considering her family and her education
Which she had learned in the nunnery.
A daughter had they between them two
Of twenty years of age, without any more,
Except for a child that was a half year of age;
In cradle it lay and was a good looking little boy.
This wench was thick and well grown,
With pug nose and eyes gray as glass,
With buttocks broad and breasts round and high.
But right fair was her hair; I will not lie.
This parson of the town, because she was fair,
Was determined to make her his heir,
Both of his property and his household,
And he raised difficulties about her marriage.
His purpose was to bestow her high
Into some worthy family of noble ancestry;
For holy church's goods must be dispensed
To holy church's blood, which is descended from the church.
Therefore he would his holy blood honor,
Though he holy church should devour.
A profitable monopoly on milling has this miller, out of doubt,
With wheat and malt of all the land about;
And namely there was an important college
People call the Soler Hall at Cambridge;
There their wheat and also their malt was ground.
And on one day it happened, at a time,
The manciple lay sick with a malady;
People thought indeed that he should die.
For which this miller stole both meal and grain
A hundred times more than before;
For before this he stole but courteously,
But now he was a thief excessively,
For which the warden (of the college) complained and made a fuss.
But the miller thought that not worth a weed;
He blustered fiercely, and swore it was not so.
Then were there two young poor scholars,
Who dwelt in this hall, of which I tell.
Headstrong they were, and eager for sport,
And, only for their mirth and amusement,
Upon the warden busily they implore
To give them leave, for but a little while,
To go to the mill and see their grain ground;
And boldly they dared pledge their necks
The miller should not steal from them half a peck
Of grain by trickery, nor rob them by force;
And at the last the warden gave hem leave.
John was called that one, and Aleyn was called that other;
Of one town were they born, that was called Strother,
Far in the north; I can not tell where.
This Aleyn makes ready all his gear,
And on a horse the sack he cast immediately.
Forth goes Aleyn the clerk, and also John,
With good sword and with buckler by their sides.
John knew the way -- they needed no guide --
And at the mill he lays the sack down.
Aleyn spoke first: "All hail, Symond, in faith!
How fares thy faire daughter and thy wife?"
"Aleyn, welcome," said Symkyn, "by my life!
And John also, how now, what do you here?"
"Symond," said John, "by God, need knows no law.
He who has no servant must serve himself,
Or else he is a fool, as clerks say.
Our manciple, I expect he will be dead,
So continually ache the teeth in his head;
And therefore I am come, and also Alayn,
To grind our grain and carry it home again;
I pray you speed us hence as fast as you can."
"It shall be done," said Symkyn, "by my faith!
What will you do while it is being done?"
"By God, right by the hopper will I stand,"
Said John, "and see how the grain goes in.
Yet saw I never, by my father's kin,
How the hopper wags to and fro."
Aleyn answered, "John, and wilt thou do so?
Then will I be beneath, by my head,
And see how the meal falls down
Into the trough; that shall be my sport.
For John, in faith, I may be like you;
I am as poor a miller as you are."
This miller smiled at their foolishness,
And thought, "All this is done only for a trick.
They think that no man can trick them,
But by my welfare, yet shall I blear their eyes (fool them),
Despite all the trickery in their philosophy.
The more ingenious tricks that they make,
The more will I steal when I take.
Instead of flour yet will I give them bran.
`The greatest clerks are not the wisest men,'
As once to the wolf thus spoke the mare.
All their learning I reckon not worth a weed."
Out at the door he goes full stealthily,
When he saw his time, quietly.
He looks up and down until he has found
The clerks' horse, where it stood tied
Behind the mill, under an arbor;
And to the horse he goes gently; 
He strips off the bridle right away.
And when the horse was loose, he begins to go
Toward the fen, where wild mares run,
And forth with "wehee," through thick and through thin.
This miller goes back to the mill, no word he said,
But does his work, and with the clerks amused himself
Until their grain was completely ground.
And when the meal is sacked and tied,
This John goes out and finds his horse gone away,
And began to cry "Help!" and "Wellaway!
Our horse is lost, Alayn, for God's bones,
Step on thy feet! Come on, man, quickly!
Alas, our warden has lost his saddle horse."
This Aleyn forgot everything, both meal and grain;
All his skillful management was out of his mind.
"What, which way is he gone?" he began to cry.
The wife cam leaping inward at a run.
She said, "Alas! your horse goes to the fen
With wild mares, as fast as he can go.
Curses come on his hand that tied him so carelessly,
And he that should have tied the rein better!"
"Alas," said John, "Aleyn, for Christ's pain
Lay down thy sword, and I will mine also.
I am full strong (swift), God knows, as is a roe deer;
By God's heart, he shall not escape us both!
Why did thou not put the horse in the barn?
Bad luck! By God, Alayn, thou art a fool!"
These hapless clerks have run very fast 
Toward the fen, both Aleyn and also John.
And when the miller saw that they were gone,
He half a bushel of their flour has taken,
And ordered his wife to go knead it in a cake.
He said, "I suppose the clerks were leery (of what I might do).
Yet can a miller make a clerk's beard (trick a clerk),
Despite all his learning; now let them go their way!
Lo, there he goes! Yes, let the children play.
They will not catch him easily, by my crown."
These hapless clerks run up and down
With "Stop! Stop! Stand! Stand! Down there, watch out behind,
Go whistle thou, and I shall catch him here!"
But shortly, until that it was truly night,
They could not, though they did al their might,
Catch their horse, he ran always so fast,
Until in a ditch they caught him at the last.
Weary and wet, as a beast is in the rain,
Comes hapless John, and with him comes Aleyn.
"Alas," said John, "the day that I was born!
Now are we driven to contempt and to scorn.
Our grain is stolen; men will call us fools,
Both the warden and all our fellows,
And namely the miller, wellaway!"
Thus laments John as he goes by the way
Toward the mill, and the horse Bayard in his hand.
The miller sitting by the fire he found,
For it was night, and further they could not go;
But for the love of God they ask him  
For lodging and for refreshment, for their cash.
The miller said in reply, "If there be any,
Such as it is, yet shall you have your share.
My house is small, but you have learned the art of logic;
You know how by logical arguments to make a place
A mile broad out of twenty feet of space.
Let's see now if this place may suffice,
Or make it large by speech, as is your custom."
"Now, Symond," said John, "by Saint Cuthbert,
Thou art always joking, and this is nicely answered.
I have heard said, `Man shall take one of two things:
Such as he finds, or take such as he brings.'
But specially I pray thee, host dear,
Get us some food and drink, and make us good cheer,
And we will pay truly at the full.
With empty hand men may lure no hawks;
Lo, here is our silver, ready to spend."
This miller into town his daughter sent
For ale and bread, and roasted them a goose,
And tied up their horse, it should no more go loose,
And in his own bedroom made them a bed,
With sheets and with blankets nicely spread
Not ten feet or twelve from his own bed.
His daughter had a bed, all by herself,
Right in the same chamber side by side.
It could be no better, and (do you know) the cause why?
There was no larger lodging in the place.
They sup and they converse, to entertain themselves,
And drink ever strong ale of the best quality.
About midnight they went to bed.
Well has this miller varnished his head (drank heavily);
Full pale he was for drunkenness, and not red.
He belches, and he speaks through the nose
As if he had hoarseness, or had a cold.
To bed he goes, and with him goes his wife.
She was as cheerful and jolly as any jay,
So was her jolly whistle well wetted.
The cradle at her bed's feet is set,
To rock, and to give the child to suck.
And when all that was in the crock was drunk,
To bed went the daughter right away;
To bed goes Aleyn and also John;
There was no more -- they needed no sleeping potion.
This miller has imbibed so much ale
That he snorts like a horse in his sleep,
And of his tail behind he took no heed.
His wife bore him a bass accompaniment, very loud;
One could hear their snoring two furlongs away;
The wench snores also, to keep them company.
Aleyn the clerk, who heard this melody,
He poked John, and said, "Sleepest thou?
Heardest thou ever such a song before now?
Lo, such a compline (evening service) is made by them all;
May a wild fire upon their bodies fall!
Who heard ever such an amazing thing?
Yes, they shall have the best (i.e., the worst) of a bad ending.
This long night there comes to me no sleep;
But yet, no matter, all shall be for the best.
For, John," said he, "as ever I may thrive,
If I can, yon wench will I screw.
Some redress the law has shaped for us,
For, John, there is a law that says thus:
That if a man in one point is injured,
That in another he shall be relieved.
Our grain is stolen, truly, it can not be denied,
And we have had a hard time all this day;
And since I shall have no recompense
For my loss, I will have satisfaction.
By God's soul, it shall be no other way!"
This John answered, "Alayn, be careful!
The miller is a perilous man," he said,
"And if he out of his sleep suddenly awoke,
He might do injury to us both."
Aleyn answered, "I reckon him not worth a fly."
And up he rises, and by the wench he crept.
This wench lay on her back and fast slept,
Until he was so near, before she could see him,
It was too late to cry out,
And shortly to speak, they were together. 
Now play, Aleyn, for I will speak of John.
This John lies still five minutes or so,
And to himself he laments and feels sorry.
"Alas!" said he, "this is a wicked trick;
Now may I say that I am nothing but a fool.
Yet has my fellow something for his harm;
He has the miller's daughter in his arm.
He took a risk, and has accomplished his purpose,
And I lie like a sack of rubbish in my bed;
And when this trick is told another day,
I shall be considered a fool, a weakling!
I will arise and chance it, by my faith!
`The timid one is unlucky,' thus people say."
And up he rose, and quietly he went
To the cradle, and in his hand seized it,
And carried it quietly to the foot of his bed.
Soon after this the wife stopped her snoring,
And awoke, and went out to piss,
And came back, and began to miss her cradle,
And groped here and there, but she found none.
"Alas!" said she, "I had almost gone wrong;
I had almost gone to the clerks' bed.
Ay, bless me! Then I would have made a mess of it!"
And forth she goes until she found the cradle.
She gropes always further with her hand,
And found the bed, and thought all was well,
Because the cradle by it stood,
And did not know where she was, for it was dark;
But gently she crept in to the clerk,
And lies full still, and would have gone to sleep.
Within a moment this John the clerk leaped up,
And on this good wife he lays on vigorously.
She had not had so merry an experience for a long time;
He stabs hard and deep as if he were mad.
This jolly life have these two clerks led
Until the third cock began to sing (an hour before dawn).
Aleyn grew weary at the time of dawn,
For he had labored all the long night,
And said, "Farewell, Malyne, sweet creature!
The day is come; I may no longer remain here;
But evermore, wherever I walk or ride,
I am thine own clerk, as I may prosper!"
"Now, dear sweetheart," said she, "go, farewell!
But before thou go, one thing I will tell thee:
When thou go homeward by the mill,
Right at the entry behind the door 
Thou shalt find a cake of half a bushel
That was made of thine own meal,
Which I helped my father to steal.
And, good sweetheart, God save and keep thee!"
And with that word she almost began to weep.
Aleyn up rises, and thought, "Before it dawns,
I will go creep in by my fellow,"
And found the cradle with his hand right away.
"By God," thought he, "I have gone all wrong.
My head is dizzy from my work to-night,
That makes me go not right.
I know well by the cradle I have gone wrong;
Here lies the miller and his wife also."
And forth he goes, in the name of twenty devils,
Unto the bed where the miller lay.
He expected to have crept in by his fellow John,
And in by the miller he crept right then,
And caught him by the neck, and quietly he spoke.
He said, "Thou John, thou pig's-head, awake,
For Christ's soul, and hear a real joke.
For by that lord that is called Saint James,
I have three times in this short night
Screwed the miller's daughter flat on her back,
While thou hast, like a coward, been terrified."
"Yes, false scoundrel," said the miller, "hast (thou done so)?
Ah, false traitor! False clerk!" said he,
"Thou shalt be dead, by God's worthiness!
Who dared be so bold to degrade
My daughter, who is come from such noble lineage?"
And by the Adam's apple he caught Alayn,
And he seized him angrily in turn,
And on the nose he smote him with his fist.
Down ran the bloody stream upon his breast;
And on the floor, with nose and mouth badly broken,
They wallow as do two pigs in a bag;
And up they go, and down again straightway,
Until the miller stumbled on a stone,
And down he fell backward upon his wife,
Who knew nothing of this foolish strife;
For she was fallen asleep a little bit
With John the clerk, who had been awake all night,
And with the fall out of her sleep she started up.
"Help! holy cross of Bromeholm," she said,
"In your hands! Lord, to Thee I call!
Awake, Symond! The fiend has fallen on me.
My heart is broken; help! I am as good as dead!
There lies one upon my belly and one on my head.
Help, Symkyn, for the false clerks fight!"
This John started up as fast as ever he could,
And grasps by the walls to and fro,
To find a staff; and she leaped up also,
And knew the interior of the house better than did this John,
And by the wall a staff she found right away,
And saw a little glimmering of a light,
For at a hole in shone the moon bright,
And by that light she saw both the two of them,
But surely she did not know who was who,
But she saw a white thing in her eye.
And when she did espy this white thing,
She thought the clerk had worn a night cap,
And with the staff she drew ever nearer and nearer,
And intended to have hit this Aleyn squarely,
And smote the miller on the bald skull,
So that down he goes, and cried, "Help! I die!"
These clerks beat him well and let him lie,
And dress themselves, and took their horse straightway,
And also their meal, and on their way they go.
And at the mill yet they took their cake
Of half a bushel flour, very well baked.
Thus is the proud miller well beaten,
And has lost the charge for grinding of the wheat,
And paid for the supper every bit
Of Aleyn and of John, who beat him well.
His wife is screwed, and his daughter also.
Lo, this is how it is when a miller is false!
And therefore this proverb is said very truly,
"One who does evil should not expect good."
A trickster shall himself be tricked.
And God, that sits high in majesty,
Save al this company, high ranking and low (every one)!
Thus have I repaid the Miller in my tale.
The minister and the nurse of vices,
Which men call in English Idleness,
Who is porter of the gate of pleasures
To shun, and by her contrary to overcome her --
That is to say, by keeping busy in lawful good works --
Well ought we to do all our diligence
Lest the fiend by means of idleness seize us.
For he that with his thousand sly snares
Continually lies in wait to seize us suddenly,
When he can espy a man in idleness,
He can catch him in his trap so quickly,
That until a man is seized right by the hem of his garment,
He is not aware that the fiend has him in hand.
Well ought we to work and resist idleness.
And even though people never dreaded to die,
Yet they can well see by reason, doubtless,
That idleness is rotten laziness,
From which there never comes any good or profit;
And since sloth holds her (Idleness) on a leash
(Allowing her) only to sleep, and to eat and drink,
And to devour all that others earn by working,
And in order to set us apart from such idleness,
Which is the cause of such great ruin,
I have here done my faithful efforts
In translating the legend 
Correctly of thy glorious life and suffering,
Thou with thy garland made with rose and lily --
I mean thee, maid and martyr, Saint Cecilie.
And thou who art the flower of all virgins,
Of whom it so well pleased Bernard to write,
To thee at my beginning first I call;
Thou comfort of us wretches, let me narrate
Thy maiden's death, that won by means of her merit
The eternal life and victory over the fiend,
As one may hereafter read in her story.
Thou Maid and Mother, daughter of thy Son,
Thou well of mercy, sinful souls' cure,
In whom God for goodness chose to dwell,
Thou humble, and high over every creature,
Thou so greatly enobled our nature,
That the Maker of humankind had no disdain 
To clothe and wrap His Son in blood and flesh.
Within the blissful cloister of thy sides
The eternal love and peace took man's shape,
He who is lord and guide of the threefold universe,
Whom earth and sea and heaven unceasing 
Ever praise; and thou, Virgin without blemish,
Bore in thy body -- and remained maiden pure --
The Creator of every creature.
Magnificence is in thee combined 
With mercy, goodness, and with such pity
That thou, who art the sun of excellence
Not only helpest them that pray thee,
But often of thy goodness 
Very willingly, before men beseech thine help,
Thou goest before and art their lives' physician.
Now, thou meek and blissful fair maid help
Me, banished exile, in this desert of bitterness;
Think on the Cananite woman, who said
That dogs eat some of all the crumbs
That from their lord's table are fallen;
And though that I, unworthy son of Eve,
Be sinful, yet accept my faith.
And, because faith is dead without works,
Give me wit and opportunity to work so,
That I may be free from that place that is most dark!
O thou, that art so fair and full of grace,
Be my advocate in that high place
Where unceasingly is sung "Hosanna,"
Thou Christ's mother, daughter dear of Anne!
And of thy light enlighten in prison my soul,
That is troubled by the contamination 
Of my body, and also by the weight
Of earthly lust and false desires;
O haven of refuge, O salvation
Of those who are in sorrow and in distress,
Now help, for to my work I will address myself.
Yet I pray you who read what I write,
Forgive me that I make no effort
To narrate this same story elaborately,
For I have both the words and the meaning 
Of him who out of reverence for the saint
Wrote the story, and  (I) follow her legend,
And pray you that you will correct (any errors in) my work.
First the name of Saint Cecilie I would to you 
Explain, as one can see in her story.
It is to say in English "heaven's lily,"
For pure chastity of virginity;
Or, because she had whiteness because of chastity,
And green because of conscience and of good reputation
The sweet smell, "lily" was her name.
Or Cecilie is to mean "the way for the blind,"
Because she set an example by good teaching;
Or else Cecile, as I written find,
Is joined, by a sort of combination
Of "heaven" and "Leah"; and here, symbolically,
The "heaven" is set for her holiness of thought,
And "Leah" for her constant business.
Cecile may also be explained in this manner,
"Lack of blindness," for her great light
Of wisdom and for her pure morals;
Or else, lo, this maidens bright name 
Comes from "heaven" and "leos," for which rightly
Men could well call her "the heaven of people,"
Exemplar of all good and wise works.
For "leos" in English means "people,"
And just as men may in the heaven see
The sun and moon and stars in every direction,
Just so in this maiden men spiritually
See the greatness of spirit of faith,
And also the complete clarity of wisdom,
And various works, bright because of their excellence.
And just as these scientists write
That heaven is swift and round and also burning,
Just so was fair Cecilie the white
Very swift and busy ever in good works,
And round and whole in persevering in good (works),
And burning ever in very bright charity.
Now have I declared to you what she was called.
This bright maiden Cecilie, as her Life says,
Was descended from Romans and of noble birth,
And from her cradle nurtured up in the faith
Of Christ, and bore his gospel in her mind.
She never ceased, as I written find,
Of her prayer and God to love and dread,
Beseeching him to preserve her virginity.
And when this maiden should unto a man
Wedded be, who was very young of age,
Who was called Valerian,
And the day of her marriage was come,
She, very devout and humble in her spirit,
Under her robe of gold, that became her very well, 
Had next to her flesh clad herself in a hair shirt.
And while the organs made melody,
To God alone in heart thus sang she:
"O Lord, my soul and also my body preserve
Immaculate, lest that I be damned."
And for his love who died upon the cross
Every second and third day she fasted,
Ever praying in her prayers very earnestly.
The night came, and to bed must she go
With her husband, as often is the manner,
And privately to him she said at once,
"O sweet and well beloved spouse dear,
There is a secret, if you want to hear it,
Which I am very eager to say to you,
Providing that you swear you shall not reveal it."
Valerian did earnestly unto her swear
That for no occasion nor thing that might be,
He should never ever betray her;
And then for the first time to him thus said she:
"I have an angel who loves me,
Who with great love, whether I wake or sleep,
Is always ready to guard my body.
"And if he may sense, withoubt doubt,
That you touch me, or love me lecherously,
He straightway will slay you in the act,
And in your youth thus you shall die;
And if you preserve me in chaste love,
He will love you as (he loves) me, for your chastity,
And show you his joy and his brightness."
Valerian, corrected as God would (have it),
Answered in reply, "If I must trust thee,
Let me see that angel and behold him;
And if it be a true angel,
Then will I do as thou hast prayed me;
And if thou love another man, in truth
Then truly with this sword will I slay you both."
Cecile answered immediately in this manner:
"If you wish, you shall see the angel,
Provided that you believe in Christ and have yourself baptized.
Go forth to the Appian Way," said she,
"That from this town stands no more than three miles,
And to the poor folks that dwell there,
Say to them exactly thus, which I shall tell you.
"Tell them that I, Cecile, sent you to them 
To show you the good Urban the old,
For secret needs and for a good purpose.
And when you have beheld Saint Urban,
Tell him the words which I told to you;
And when he has cleansed you of sin (by baptism),
Then you shall see that angel, ere you depart."
Valerian has gone to the place,
And just as he was taught by his learning (from Cecilie),
He immediately found this holy old Urban 
In hiding among the saints' burial places.
And he immediately without delay
Said his message; and when he told it,
Urban for joy did hold up his hands.
He let the tears fall from his eyes.
"Almighty Lord, O Jesus Christ," said he,
"Sower of chaste counsel, shepherd of us all,
The fruit of that same seed of chastity
That thou hast sown in Cecile, take to thee!
Lo, like a busy bee, without guile,
Always thine own servant Cecile serves Thee.
"For that same spouse that she took just now
Very like a fierce lion, she sends here,
As meek as ever was any lamb, to you!"
And with that word anon there did appear
An old man, clad in clear white clothes,
Who had in hand a book with lettering of gold ,
And did stand before Valerian.
Valerian as if dead fell down for fear
When he saw him, and the  old man picked him up then,
And from his book right thus he began to read:
"One Lord, one faith, one God, without more,
One baptism, and Father of all also,
Above all and over all everywhere."
These words were written all with gold.
When this was read, then said this old man,
"Dost thou believe this thing or not? Say yes or no."
"I believe all this thing," said Valerian,
"For truer thing than this, I dare well say,
No person under the heaven can imagine."
Then vanished this old man, he knew not where,
And Pope Urban christened him right there.
Valerian goes home and finds Cecilie
Within his room standing with an angel. 
This angel had of roses and of lily
Two crowns, which he bore in hand;
And first to Cecile, as I understand,
He gave that one, and after he did give
That other to Valerian, her mate.
"With body clean and with unblemished thought
Always guard well these crowns," said he;
"From paradise I have brought them to you,
Nor never ever shall they be rotten,
Nor lose their sweet fragrance, trust me;
Nor never a person shall see them with his eye,
Unless he be chaste and hates villainy.
"And thou, Valerian, because thou so soon
Assented to good counsel also,
Say what pleases thee, and thou shalt have thy request."
"I have a brother," said Valerian then,
"And in this world I love no man so much.
I pray you that my brother may have grace
To know the truth, as I do in this place."
The angel said, "God likes thy request,
And both (of you) with the palm of martyrdom
You shall come unto his blissful feast."
And with that word Tiburce his brother came.
And when he perceived the fragrance,
Which the roses and the lilies cast forth
Within his heart he began to wonder intently,
And said, "I wonder, this time of the year,
Whence that sweet fragrance comes so (much)
Of rose and lilies that I smell here.
For even if I had them in my two hands,
The fragrance could go in me no deeper.
The sweet smell that in my heart I find
Has changed me all into another nature."
Valerian said: "Two crowns have we,
Snow white and rose red, that shine clear,
Which thine eyes have no power to see;
And as thou smellest them because of my prayer,
So shalt thou see them, beloved brother dear,
If it so be thou will, without delaying,
Believe correctly and know real truth."
Tiburce answered, "Sayest thou this to me
In actuality, or do I hear this in dream?"
"In dreams," said Valerian, "have we been
Until this time, my brother, indeed.
But now for the first time our dwelling is in truth."
"How knowest thou this?" said Tiburce, "and in what manner?"
Said Valerian, "That I shall tell thee.
"The angel of God has taught me the truth
Which thou shalt see, if thou wilt renounce
The idols and be chaste, and otherwise nothing (will you see.)"
And of the miracle of these two crowns
Saint Ambrose in his preface is pleased to speak;
Solemnly this noble dear Doctor (of the Church)
Commends it, and says in this manner:
"In order to receive the palm of martyrdom,
Saint Cecile, completely filled with God's gift,
The world and also her bed-chamber did she give up;
Witness Tyburce's and Valerian's confession,
To which God of his goodness would provide
Two crowns of flowers well smelling,
And made his angel bring them the crowns.
"The maid has brought these men to bliss above;
The world has known what it is worth, certainly,
To love a devotion to chastity."
Then Cecile showed him all open and plain
That all idols are but meaningless things,
For they are dumb, and moreover they are deaf,
And (she) ordered him to leave his idols.
"Whoever believes not this, he is a beast,"
Tiburce then said, "if I shall not lie."
And she who heard this did kiss his breast,
And was very glad he could perceive truth.
"This day I take thee for my kinsman,"
Said this blissful fair maid dear,
And after that she said as you may hear:
"Lo, exactly as the love of Christ," said she,
"Made me thy brother's wife, exactly in that manner
Right now here I take thee for my kinsman,
Since thou will despise thine idols.
Go with thy brother now, and get thyself baptized,
And make thyself clean, so that thou can behold
The angel's face of which thy brother told."
Tiburce answered and said, "Brother dear,
First tell me where I must go, and to what man?"
"To whom?" said he, "come forth with right good cheer, 
I will lead thee unto the Pope Urban."
"To Urban? My brother Valerian,"
Said then Tiburce, "wilt thou lead me there?
It seems to me that it would be a wonderful deed.
"Thou meanest not Urban," said he then,
"That is so often condemned to be dead,
And dwells in hiding places always (going) from one to another, 
And dares not once put forth his head?
Men should burn him in a fire so red
If he were found, or if men could catch sight of him,
And we too (would burn), to bear him company;
"And while we seek that same divinity
That is hidden secretly in heaven,
Nevertheless we shall be burned in this world!"
To whom Cecile answered boldly,
"Men might well and reasonably fear
To lose this life, my own dear brother,
If this were the only life and (there were) none other.
"But there is a better life in another place,
That never shall be lost, doubt thee not,
Which God's Son told us by means of his grace. 
That Father's Son has created all things,
And all that is created (and endowed) with the power of reason;
The Holy Ghost, who from the Father did proceed,
Has given them souls, without any doubt.
"By word and by miracle high God's Son,
When he was in this world, declared here
That there was another life where men may dwell."
To whom answered Tiburce, "O sister dear,
Said thou not just now in this manner,
There is but one God, lord in truthfulness?
And now of three how canst thou bear witness?"
"That shall I tell," said she, "ere I go.
Exactly as a man has three mental faculties --
Memory, imagination, and judgement also --
So in one being of divinity,
Three persons may right well be there."
Then very zealously she did preach to him 
Of Christ's coming, and teach (him) of His pains,
And many particulars of His passion;
How God's Son was compelled to remain in this world 
To provide full forgiveness for mankind,
Which was bound in sin and painful cares;
All this thing she told unto Tiburce.
And after this Tiburce with a good will
With Valerian he went to Pope Urban,
Who thanked God, and with glad and happy heart 
He christened him and made him in that place
Perfect in his learning, God's knight.
And after this Tiburce got such grace
That every day in real time and space he saw 
The angel of God; and every manner of gift
That he asked of God was provided immediately.
It would be very hard in proper sequence to say
How many wonders Jesus made for them;
But at the last, to tell short and plain,
The officers of the law of the town of Rome sought them,
And brought them before Almache, the prefect,
Who questioned them, and knew all their thought,
And sent them to the image of Jupiter,
And said, "Whoever will not sacrifice,
Strike off his head; this is my sentence here."
Immediately these martyrs of whom I tell you,
One Maximus, that was an officer
Of the prefect's, and his chief assistant,
Seized them, and when he led forth the saints,
He himself wept for pity that he had.
When Maximus had heard the saints' teaching,
He got himself permission of the executioners, 
And led them to his house without more delay,
And with their preaching, ere that it was evening,
They did take away from the executioners,
And from Maxime, and from his folk each one of them,
The false faith, (and brought them) to believe in God alone.
Cecile came, when it was grown night,
With priests who christened them all together;
And afterward, when day was grown light,
Cecile said to them with a full steadfast countenance,
"Now, Christ's own knights beloved and dear,
Cast away all the works of darkness,
And arm yourselves in armor of brightness.
"You have truly done a great battle,
Your race is done, your faith you have maintained.
Go to the crown of life that can not fail;
The rightful Judge, whom you have served,
Shall give it to you, as you have deserved it."
And when this thing was said as I tell,
Men led them forth to do the sacrifice.
But when they were brought to the place 
To tell shortly the conclusion,
They would not incense nor sacrifice in any way,
But on their knees they set themselves down
With humble heart and steadfast devotion,
And lost both their heads in the place.
Their souls went to the King of grace.
This Maximus, who saw this thing happen,
With piteous tears told it right away,
That he saw their souls glide to heaven 
With angels full of clearness and of light,
And with his word converted many a person;
For which Almachius had him so beaten
With whip tipped with lead that he left his life.
Cecile took him and buried him straightway
By Tiburce and Valerian tenderly
Within their burying place, under the tombstone;
And after this, Almachius hastily
Ordered his ministers to fetch publicly 
Cecile, so that she might in his presence
Do sacrifice and burn incense to Jupiter.
But they, converted by her wise teaching,
Wept very bitterly, and gave full credence
Unto her word, and cried more and more,
"Christ, God's Son, without difference [between Father and Son],
Is true God -- this is the belief of us all -- 
That has so good a servant to serve Him.
This unanimously we believe, even if we should die!"
Almachius, that heard of this business,
Ordered (his men to) fetch Cecile, so that he might see her
And first of all, lo, this was his quesation.
"What sort of woman art thou?" then said he.
"I am a gentle woman born," said she.
"I ask thee," said he, "though it may grieve thee,
About thy religion and about thy belief."
"You have begun your question foolishly,"
Said she, "you who would include two answers 
In one question; you asked ignorantly."
Almache answered unto that refutation,
"Of whence comes thine answering so rude?"
"Of whence?" said she, when she was asked,
"Of conscience and of sincere good faith."
Almachius said, "Takest thou no heed
Of my power?" And she answered him this:
"Your might," said she, "is very little to fear,
For every mortal man's power is nothing 
But only like a bladder full of wind, indeed.
For with a needle's point, when it is blown up,
Can all the arrogance of it be laid full low."
"Full wrongfully thou began," said he,
"And yet wrongful is thy perseverance.
Dost thou not know how our mighty noble princes
Have thus commanded and made a law
That every Christian person shall be punished
Unless he renounce his Christian faith,
And go all free, if he will deny it?"
"Your princes err, as your nobles do,"
Said then Cecile, "and with a crazy verdict
You make us guilty, and it is not true.
For you, who know well our innocence,
Forasmuch as we do reverence
To Christ, and because we bear a Christian name,
You accuse us of a crime and also (put on us) the blame for it.
"But we who know that same name 
To be so virtuous, we can not deny it."
Almache answered, "Chose one of these two:
Do sacrifice, or renounce Christendom,
So that thou can now escape by that means."
At which the holy blissful fair maid
Began to laugh, and to the judge said:
"O judge, confused in thy folly,
Wilt thou that I renounce innocence,
To make myself a wicked person?" said she.
"Lo, he hides his true feelings here in open court; 
He stares, and goes mad in his mind!"
To whom Almachius, "Miserable wretch,
Knowest thou not how far my power can stretch?
"Have not our mighty princes to me given,
Yea, both power and authority
To make folk to die or to live?
Why speakest thou so proudly then to me?"
"I speak only faithfully," said she;
"Not proudly, for I say, as for my side,
We hate that same deadly sin of pride.
"And if thou dread not to hear a truth,
Then will I show all openly, according to law,
That thou hast made a very great lie here.
Thou sayest thy princes have given thee power
Both to slay and to give life to a person;
Thou, who can only take away life,
Thou hast no other power nor any authority.
"But thou can say thy princes have made thee
Minister of death; for if thou speak of more,
Thou liest, for thy power is strictly limited.
"Do away thy boldness," said Almachius then,
"And sacrifice to our gods ere thou go!
I care not what wrong that thou may express to me,
For I can suffer it as a philosopher;
"But those same wrongs I can not endure
Which thou spekest of our gods here," said he.
Cecile answered, "O foolish creature!
Thou saidest no word since thou spoke to me
That I did not know therewith thy foolishness
And that thou were in every sort of way
An ignorant officer and a foolish judge.
"There lacks nothing to thine outer eyes
Except that thou art blind; for thing that we all see 
That it is stone -- that men can well see --
That same stone a god thou wilt call it.
I advise thee, let thine hand upon it fall
And taste it well, and stone thou shalt find it,
Since thou seest not with thy blind eyes.
"It is a shame that the people shall
So scorn thee and laugh at thy folly,
For without exception men know it well everywhere
That mighty God is in his high heavens;
And these images, thou canst well see,
Can do no profit to thee nor to themselves,
For in fact they are not worth a penny."
These words and others such said she,
And he grew angry, and ordered that men should lead her
Home to her house, and "In her house," said he,
"Burn her right in a bath of red flames."
And as he ordered, exactly so the deed was done;
For they did shut her fast in a cauldron,
And night and day they fed great fire under it.
The long night, and also a day as well,
Despite the fire and also the bath's heat 
She sat all cool and felt no pain.
It made her not a drop to sweat.
But in that bath her life she must leave,
For that Almachius, with completely wicked intent,
Sent his messenger to slay her in the bath.
Three strokes in the neck he smote her then,
The executioner, but in no sort of way
He could not smite all her neck in two;
And because there was that time an ordinance
That no man should do any one such pain
The fourth stroke to smite, soft or sore,
This executioner dared not do any more,
But half dead, with her neck carved there,
He left her lie, and on his way he went.
The Christian folk, who were about her,
With sheets have very carefully taken up the blood.
Three days she lived in this torment,
And never ceased to teach them the faith 
That she had fostered; to them she did preach,
And she gave them her personal property and her things,
And to the Pope Urban (she) entrusted them then,
And said, "I asked this of heaven's king,
To have respite three days and no more
To commend to you, ere I go,
These souls, lo, and that I might have made
Here of my house perpetually a church."
Saint Urban with his deacons secretly
Fetched the body and buried it by night
Among his other saints decently.
Her house is called the church of Saint Cecilie;
Saint Urban consecrated it, as he well could;
In which, unto this day, in noble manner,
People do service to Christ and to his saint.
When the life of Saint Cecile was ended,
Before we had ridden a good five miles,
At Boghtoun under Blee overtook us 
A man who was clothed in black clothes,
And underneath that he had a white surplice.
His riding horse, that was all dapple gray,
So sweated that it was a wonder to see;
It seemed as if he had spurred hard for three miles.
The horse also that his yeoman rode upon
So sweated that it could hardly move.
About the collar stood the foam very high;
He was by foam all flecked like a magpie.
A double bag on his crupper lay;
It seemed that he carried little gear.
All lightly clad for summer rode this worthy man,
And in my heart I began to wonder
What he was until I understood
How his cloak was sewn to his hood,
For which, when I had long thought about it,
I judged him to be some sort of canon.
His hat hung at his back down by a strap,
For he had ridden at more than a trot or a walk;
He had always spurred as if he were crazy.
A burdock-leaf he had under his hood
For sweat and to keep his head from heat.
But what a joy it was to see him sweat!
His forehead dripped like a still
Full of the herbs plantain and pellitory.
And when he was come to us, he began to cry out,
"God save," said he, "this jolly company!
Fast have I spurred," said he, "for your sake,
Because I wanted to overtake you,
To ride in this merry company."
His yeoman also was full of courtesy,
And said, "Sirs, just now in the morning time
I saw you ride out of your hostelry,
And told my lord here and my sovereign,
Who is very eager to ride with you 
For his pleasure; he loves sociability."
"Friend, for thy telling him God give thee good luck,"
Then said our Host, "for certainly it would seem
Thy lord is wise, and as I can well judge.
He is very cheerful also, I dare wager!
Can he in any way tell a merry tale or two,
With which he may gladden this company?"
"Who, sir? My lord? Yes, yes, without lie,
He knows about mirth and also about jollity
More than enough; also, sir, trust me,
If you knew him as well as do I,
You would wonder how well and craftily
He knows how to work, and that in a variety of ways.
He has taken on him many a great enterprise,
Which would be very hard for any one who is here
To bring about, unless they learn it from him.
Despite how modestly he rides amongst you,
If you knew him, it would be to your advantage.
You would not forgo his acquaintance
For great riches, I dare wager on that
All that I have in my possession.
He is a man of great discretion;
I tell you indeed, he is a remarkable man."
"Well," said our Host, "I pray thee, tell me then,
Is he a clerk, or not? Tell what he is."
"Nay, he is greater than a clerk, indeed,"
Said this Yeoman, "and in few words,
Host, I will show you something of his craft.
"I say, my lord knows such esoteric science --
But all his craft you can not know from me,
And yet somewhat I help in his work --
That all this ground on which we are riding,
Until we come to Canterbury town,
He could turn all completely upside down,
And pave it all with silver and with gold."
And when this Yeoman had this tale told
Unto our Host, he said, "Bless you!
This thing is wonderfully marvelous to me,
Since thy lord is of such great prudence,
Because of which men should reverence him,
That he cares so little for his own self-respect.
His outer garment is not worth a fraction of a penny,
Because in fact, to him, as I may go (I swear), 
It is all dirty and tattered also.
Why is thy lord so slovenly, I pray thee,
And has the power to buy better cloth,
If his deeds accord with thy speech?
Tell me that, and of that I beseech thee."
"Why?" said this Yeoman, "why do you ask me?
So help me God, for he shall never prosper!
(But I will not publicly acknowledge what I say,
And therefore keep it secret, I pray you.)
He is too wise, in faith, as I believe.
That which is done too much, it will not turn out
Right, as clerks say; it is a vice.
Therefore in that I hold him ignorant and foolish.
For when a man has too great a wit,
Very often he happens to misuse it.
So does my lord, and that sorely grieves me;
God amend it! I can tell you no more."
"That does not matter, good Yeoman," said our Host;
"Since thou knowest of the cunning of thy lord,
Tell how he does, I pray thee heartily,
Since he is so crafty and so sly.
Where do you dwell, if it can be told?"
"In the outskirts of a town," said he,
"Lurking in hiding places and in dead-end alleys,
Where these robbers and these thieves by nature
Hold their private fearful residence,
Like those who dare not show their presence;
So fare we, if I shall say the truth."
"Now," said our Host, "yet let me talk to thee.
Why art thou so discolored in thy face?"
"Peter!" said he, "God give it bad luck,
I am so used to blow in the fire 
That it has changed my color, I believe.
I am not accustomed to peer in any mirror,
But to work hard and to learn to transmute metals.
We blunder ever and stare in the fire,
And despite all that, we fail to achieve our desire,
For ever we lack our desired conclusion.
To many folk we do delusion,
And borrow gold, be it a pound or two,
Or ten, or twelve, or many greater sums,
And make them believe, at the very least,
That of one pound we could make two.
Yet is it false, but always we have good hope
To do it, and after it we grope.
But that knowledge is so far ahead of us,
We can not, although we had sworn it,
Overtake it, it slides away so fast.
It will make us beggars at the last."
While this Yeoman was thus in his talking,
This Canon drew himself nearer and heard every thing
Which this Yeoman spoke, for suspicion
Of men's speech ever had this Canon.
For Cato says that he who is guilty
Believes every thing is spoken about him, indeed.
That was the cause he did draw himself so near 
To his Yeoman, to hear all his speech.
And thus he said unto his Yeoman then:
"Hold thou thy peace and speak no more words,
For if thou do, thou shalt dearly pay for it.
Thou slanderest me here in this company,
And also revealest what thou shouldest hide."
"Yes," said our Host, "tell on, whataever may happen.
Reckon all his threatening not worth a fraction of a penny!" 
"In faith," said he, "I do (reckon him) but little any more."
And when this Canon saw it would not be,
But that his Yeoman would tell his secrets,
He fled away for true sorrow and shame.
"Ah!" said the Yeoman, "here shall arise some amusement;
Right now I will tell all that I know.
Since he is gone, may the foul fiend kill him!
For never hereafter will I meet with him 
For penny nor for pound, I promise you.
He who brought me first unto that game,
Before he dies, may he have sorrow and shame!
For it is serious (not game) to me, by my faith;
That feel I well, whatever any man says.
And yet, for all my pain and all my grief,
For all my sorrow, labor, and mischief,
I could never leave it in any way.
Now I wish to God my wit might suffice
To tell all that belongs to that art!
But nonetheless you desire that I tell part.
Since my lord is gone, I will not spare;
Such things as what I know, I will declare.
With this Canon I have dwelt seven years,
And as to his science I am never the nearer (to success).
All that I had I have lost thereby,
And, God knows, so have many more than I.
Where I was accustomed to be right fresh and gay
Of clothing and of other splendid furnishings,
Now may I wear a hose upon my head;
And whereas my color was both fresh and red,
Now is it pale and of a leaden hue --
Whoever uses it (that art), sorely shall he rue! --
And by my work yet my eye is bleared.
Lo, how profitable it is to transute metals!
That slippery science has made me so bare 
That I have no possessions, wherever I fare;
And yet by this I am so indebted 
For gold that I have borrowed, truly,
That while I live I shall never repay it.
Let every man be warned by me forever!
Whatever sort of man that applies himself to that,
If he continue, I consider his prosperity done for.
For so help me God, he shall not profit thereby,
But empty his purse and make his wits thin.
And when he through his madness and folly
Has lost his own possessions in this dangerous business,
Then he incites other folk to that,
To lose their possessions as he himself has done.
For unto scoundrels it is joy and ease
To have their fellows in pain and hardship.
Thus was I once taught by a clerk.
No matter about that; I will speak of our work.
When we are where we shall exercise
Our mysterious craft, we seem wonderfully wise,
Our terms are so scholarly and so strange.
I blow the fire until my heart faints.
Why should I tell each proportion
Of the things that we work upon --
As on five or six ounces, it may well be,
Of silver, or some other quantity --
And busy myself to tell you the names
Of orpiment (arsenic trisulfide), burned bones, iron flakes,
That are ground into very fine powder;
And how all is put in an earthen pot,
And salt put in, and also pepper,
Before these powders that I speak of here;
And well covered with a lamp-shaped vessel of glass;
And of many other things which were there;
And sealing of the pot and glasses
So that not a bit of the air could pass out;
And of the slow fir, and fast also,
Which was made, and of the care and woe
That we had in purifying our materials,
And in blending and reducing to powder
Of quicksilver, called raw mercury?
Despite all our tricks we can not succeed.
Our orpiment (arsenic trisulfide), and purified mercury,
Our litharge (lead monoxide) ground also on the porphyry mortar,
A certain number of ounces of each of these --
Nothing helps us; our labor is in vain.
Also neither our spirit's vaporization,
Nor our materials that remain fixed in the pot,
Can in any way help us in our working,
For all our labor and travail is lost;
And all the expenditure, in the name of twenty devils,
Which we spent upon it, is lost also.
There is also very many another thing
That pertains unto our craft.
Though I can not list them in their proper order,
Because I am an unlearned man,
Yet will I tell them as they come to mind,
Though I can not set them in their proper categories:
Such as armenian bol (red clay), verdigris (copper acetate), borax,
And various vessels made of clay and glass,
Our urinals and our retorts,
Vials, crucibles, and sublimation vessels,
Vessels for distilling and alembics also,
And other such things, very expensive at the price of a leek --
There ia no need to list them all --
Liquids that cause reddening, and bull's gall,
Arsenic, sal ammoniac, and brimstone;
And herbs could I tell also many a one,
Such as agrimony, valerian, and moonwort,
And other such things, if I wanted to tarry;
Our lamps burning both night and day,
To bring about our purpose, if we can;
Also our furnace for reducing substances to powder,
And of whitening by liquids;
Unslaked lime, chalk, and white of an egg,
Various powders, ashes, dung, piss, and clay,
Waxed (waterproofed) packets, saltpeter, sulphuric acid,
And various sorts of fires made of wood and coal;
Potassium nitrate, alkali, and purified salt,
And burned materials and solidified;
Clay made with horse or man's hair, and oil
Of tartar, crystallized alum, yeast, unfermented malt, and argol,
Arsenic, and soaking our materials,
And also of forming a compound of our materials,
And of turning our silver to a yellow color,
Our fusion by heat and fermentation,
Our casting molds, crucibles for testing, and many more.
I will tell you, as it was taught also to me,
The four spirits and the seven metals
By order, as often I heard my lord name them.
The first spirit is called quicksilver,
The second orpiment (arsenic trisulfide), the third, indeed,
Sal ammoniac, and the fourth brimstone.
The seven metals also, lo, hear them now:
Sun is gold, and Moon silver we say,
Mars iron, Mercury we call quicksilver,
Saturn lead, and Jupiter is tin,
And Venus copper, by my father's kin!
Whoever will exercise this cursed craft,
He shall have no wealth that can be enough for him,
For all the wealth he spends on this
He shall lose; of that have I no doubt.
Whoever desires to make public his folly,
Let him come forth and learn to transmute base metals;
And every man that has anything in his strong-box,
Let him appear and become an alchemist.
Is that craft were so easy to learn?
Nay, nay, God knows, be he monk or friar,
Priest or canon, or any other creature,
Though he sit at his book both day and night
In learning of this mysterious foolish lore,
All is in vain, and by God, much more.
To teach an ignorant man this ingenious skill --
Fie! Speak not about that, for it will not be.
And know he book learning or know he none,
In fact, he shall find it all the same.
For both of the two, by my salvation,
Conclude in transmutation
Equally well, when they are all done;
This is to say, they fail, both of the two.
Yet I forgot to make enumeration 
Of acidic waters, and of metal filings,
And of the softening of materials,
And also of their hardening;
Oils, cleansings, and fusible metal --
To tell all would be longer than any large book
That is anywhere; therefore, as for the best,
Of all these names now I will rest myself,
For, as I believe, I have told you enough
To raise a fiend, though he look never so rough.
Ah! Nay! Let be; the philosophers' stone,
Called Elixir, we seek earnestly each one of us;
For if we had it, then we would be very well off.
But unto God of heaven I make avow,
Despite all our craft, when we have all done,
And all our skill, he will not come us to.
He has made us spend much money,
For sorrow of which we almost go mad,
Except that good hope creeps into our heart,
Supposing ever, though we sorely suffer,
To be relieved by him afterward.
Such supposing and hope is sharp and hard;
I warn you well, it is to keep seeking forever.
That future tense has made men to be separated,
In trust on that, from all that ever they had.
Yet of that art they can not be satisfied,
For unto them it is a bitter sweet --
So it seems -- for had they nothing but a sheet
Which they might wrap themselves in at night,
And a rough cloak to walk in by daylight,
They would sell them and spend it on this craft.
They can not stop until nothing is left.
And evermore, wherever they go,
Men can know them by the smell of brimstone.
For all the world they stink like a goat;
Their odor is so like a goat and so intense
That though a man be a mile from them,
The odor will infect him, trust me.
Lo, thus by smelling and threadbare array,
If men so desire, this folk they can know.
And if a man will ask them privily
Why they are clothed so poorly,
They right away will whisper in his ear,
And say that if they were recognized,
Men would slay them because of their knowledge.
Lo, thus these folk betray innocence!
Pass over this; I go unto my tale.
Before the pot on the fire is done,
With a specific quantity of metals,
My lord tempers them, and no man but he --
Now he is gone, I dare say boldly --
For, as men say, he can work craftily.
Although I know well he has such a reputation;
And yet very often he gets in trouble.
And do you know how? Full often it so happens
The pot shatters, and farewell, all is gone!
These metals are of such great violence
The sides of our vessels can not make resistance to them,
Unless they were made of lime and stone;
They pierce so, and through the wall they go.
And some of them sink into the ground --
Thus have we quickly lost many a pound --
And some are scattered all over the floor;
Some leap into the roof. Without doubt,
Though the fiend does not show himself to our sight,
I believe he is with us, that same scoundrel!
In hell, where he is lord and sire,
There is no greater woe, nor greater rancor nor ire.
When our pot is broken, as I have said,
Every man chides and considers himsef ill used.
Some said it was due to the making of the fire;
Some said nay, it was due to the blowing --
Then was I afraid, for that was my job.
"Rubbish!" said the third, "you are ignorant and foolish.
It was not tempered as it ought to be."
"Nay," said the fourth, "be quiet and listen to me.
Because our fire was not made of beech,
That is the cause and none other, as I may prosper!"
I can not tell what it was due to,
But well I know great strife is among us.
"Well," said my lord, "there is no more to do;
Of these perils I will be wary next time.
I am very sure that the pot was cracked.
Be as be may, be you in no way amazed;
As our practice is, have the floor quickly swept,
Pluck up your hearts and be glad and blithe."
The rubbish was swept in a heap,
And on the floor was cast a canvas,
And all this rubbish thrown in a sieve 
And sifted, and picked over many a time.
"By God," said one, "something of our metal
Yet is there here, though we have not all.
And though this thing may have turned out badly this time,
Another time it may go well indeed.
We must put our possessions at risk.
A merchant, by God, may not endure forever,
Trust me well, in his prosperity.
Sometimes his goods are drowned in the sea,
And sometime they come safely unto the land."
"Quiet!" said my lord, "the next time I will endeavor
To bring our experiment to an entirely different state,
And unless I do, sirs, let me have the blame.
There was something wrong, I well know."
Another said the fire was too hot --
But, be it hot or cold, I dare say this,
That we conclude always with something gone wrong.
We fail to get that which we want to have,
And in our madness always we rave.
And when we are all together every one,
Every man seems a Solomon.
But every thing thah shines like gold
Is not gold, as I have heard said;
Nor every apple that is fair to the eye
Is not good, whatever men may chatter or cry.
Right so, lo, it fares among us:
He who seems the wisest, by Jesus,
Is the greatest fool, when it comes to the proof;
And he that seems truest is a thief.
That shall you know, before I from you wend,
By the time that I have made an end of my tale.
There is a canon regular
Amongst us, who would infect a whole town,
Though it were as big as was Nineveh,
Rome, Alexandria, Troy, and any three others.
His tricks and his infinite falseness
No man could write, as I guess,
Though he might live a thousand years.
In all this world is not his equal in falsehood,
For in his technical terms he will so wrap himself,
And speak his words in so deceitful a manner,
When he shall converse with any person,
That he will make a fool of him right away,
Unless it be a fiend, as he himself is.
Very many a man has he beguiled before this,
And will, if he may live a while longer;
And yet men ride and walk very many a mile
To seek him and have his acquaintance,
Not knowing of his false way of life.
And if you want to listen to me,
I will tell it here in your presence.
But worshipful religious canons,
Do not think that I slander your house,
Although my tale be about a canon.
There is some scoundrel in every order, by God,
And God forbid that a whole company
Should suffer for one single man's folly.
To slander you is not at all my intention,
But I mean to correct what is amiss.
This tale was not only told for you,
But also for many others; you know well 
That among Christ's twelve apostles 
There was no traitor but Judas himself.
Then why should all the remnant have the blame
Who were guiltless? Concerning you I say the same,
Save only this, if you will listen to me:
If any Judas be in your convent,
Remove him quickly, I advise you,
If the prospect of shame or dishonor can cause any fear.
And be not at all displeased, I pray you,
But in this case listen to what I shall say.
In London was a priest, a chantry priest,
Who therein had dwelled many a year,
Who was so pleasant and so attentive
Unto the woman, where he took his meals,
That she would not allow him to pay anything
For board nor clothing, went he never so gay,
And he had plenty of spending money.
That does not not matter; I will now proceed,
Who brought this priest to ruin.
This false canon came upon one day
Unto this priest's chamber, where he stayed,
Beseeching him to lend him a certain amount
Of gold, and he would pay it back to him again.
"Loan me a mark," said he, "for only three days,
And at my assigned day I will repay it to thee.
And if it so be that thou find me false,
The next day have me hanged by the neck!"
This priest gave him a mark, and that very quickly,
And this canon thanked him many times,
And took his leave, and went forth on his way,
And at the third day brought his money,
And to the priest he gave back his gold,
For which this priest was wonderfully glad and happy.
"Certainly," said he, "in no way does it annoy me
To lend a man a noble, or two, or three,
Or whatever thing if it were in my possession,
When he is so true, of such character
That in no way will he fail to pay on his assigned day:
To such a man I can never say no."
"What!" said this canon, "should I be untrue?
Nay, that would be a thing completely without precedent.
My pledged word is a thing that I will always keep
Until that day in which I shall creep
Into my grave, and God forbid it be otherwise.
Believe this is as true as your Creed.
I thank God, and rightly it may be said,
That there was never man yet suffered evil
For gold or silver that he lent to me,
Nor did I ever intend falsehood in my heart.
And sir," said he, "now some of my secrets,
Since you have been so goodly unto me,
And shown to me such great courtesy,
Something with which to repay your kindness
I will show you, and if you want to learn,
I will teach you fully the manner
How I know how to to work in alchemy.
Pay cl,ose attention; you shall well see by eye
That I will do a masterful work before I go."
"Yes," said the priest, "yes, sir, and will you so?
By Saint Mary, for that I pray you heartily."
"At your commandment, sir, truly,"
Said the canon, "and otherwise God forbid!"
Lo, how this thief could offer his service!
Very true it is that such a favor not asked for
Stinks, as these old wise writers bear witness,
And very soon I will verify it
In (the deeds of) this canon, root of all treachery,
Who evermore has delight and gladness --
Such fiendish thoughts in his heart are fixed --
How he can bring Christ's people to mischief.
God keep us from his false dissimulation!
This priest knew not with whom he dealt,
And of his coming harm he felt nothing.
O hapless priest! O hapless innocent!
Very soon thou shalt be blinded by greed!
O unfortunate, completely blind is thy mind,
In no way art thou aware of the deceit
Which this fox has destined for thee!
His cunning deceptions thou canst not flee.
Therefore, to go to the conclusion,
That refers to thy ruin,
Unhappy man, right now I will hasten myself
To tell thy lack of prudence and thy folly,
And also the falseness of that other wretch,
Insofar as my skill will stretch.
This canon was my lord, you would suppose?
Sir host, in faith, and by the heaven's queen,
It was another canon, and not he,
Who knows a hundred times more trickery.
He has betrayed folks many a time;
It distresses me to compose rimes about his falseness.
Every time I speak of his falsehood,
For shame of him my cheeks grow red.
At least they begin to glow,
For redness have I none, very well I know,
In my visage; for various fumes
Of metals, which you have heard me rehearse,
That have consumed and wasted my redness.
Now pay attention to this canon's cursedness!
"Sir," said he to the priest, "have your man go
For quicksilver, would that we had it right now;
And have him bring two or three ounces;
And when he comes, quickly you shall see
A wonderful thing, which you never saw before this."
"Sir," said the priest, "it shall be done, indeed."
He bad his servant fetch him this thing,
And he was all ready at his bidding,
And went forth, and came right back again
With this quicksilver, shortly to say,
And gave these three ounces to the canon;
And he laid them down neatly and carefully,
And bad the servant to bring coals,
So that he might go to his working right away.
The coals right away were fetched,
And this canon took out a crucible
From his bosom, and showed it to the priest.
"This instrument," said he, "which thou seest,
Take in thy hand, and thyself put therein
An ounce of this quicksilver, and here begin,
In the name of Christ, to become an alchemist.
There are very few to whom I would offer
To show them thus so much of my science.
For you shall see here, by experience,
That this quicksilver I will harden
Right in your sight indeed, without lie,
And make it as good silver and as fine
As there is any in your purse or mine,
Or elsewhere, and make it malleable;
And otherwise consider me false and unable
For ever to appear amongst folk.
I have a powder here, that cost me dearly,
Shall make all good, for it is cause of all
My cunning, which I shall show you.
Send away your man, and have him be outside,
And shut the door, while we are about
Our secret business, so that no man espy us,
While we work in this science."
All was in deed fulfilled as he commanded.
This same servant right away went out,
And his master shut the door quickly,
And to their labor speedily they go.
This priest, at this cursed canon's bidding,
Upon the fire at once set this thing,
And blew the fire, and busied himself very intently.
And this canon into the crucible cast
A powder, I do not know of what it was
Made, either of chalk, or of glass,
Or something else, that was not worth a fly,
With which to blind this priest; and bade him hasten
To lay all the coals above
The crucible. "To serve as a sign that I love thee,"
Said this canon, "thine own two hands
Shall do every thing that shall here be done."
"Many thanks," said the priest, and was very glad,
And laid the coals as the canon bad.
And while he was busy, this fiendish wretch,
This false canon -- may the foul fiend fetch him! --
Out of his bosom took a beech coal,
In which very skilfully was made a hole,
And therein was put of silver filings
An ounce, and was sealed shut, without doubt, 
This hole with wax, to keep the filings in.
And understand that this false device
Was not made there, but it was made before;
And other things I shall tell more
Later, which he brought with him.
Before he came there, he intended to trick him,
And so he did, before they went apart;
Until he had skinned him, he could not cease.
It distresses me when I speak of him.
I would like to avenge myself for his falsehood,
If I knew how, but he is now here and now there;
He is so changeable, he abides nowhere.
But pay attention now, sirs, for God's love!
He took his coal of which I spoke above,
And in his hand he bore it secretly.
And while the priest busily laid
The coals, as I told you before this,
This canon said, "Friend, you do it wrong.
This is not arranged as it ought to be;
But soon I shall amend it," said he.
"Now let me work with it but a while,
For I have pity of you, by Saint Gile!
You are very hot; I see well how you sweat.
Have here a cloth, and wipe away the wetness."
And while the priest wiped his face,
This canon took his coal -- may he have bad luck! --
And laid it above, upon the middle
Of the crucible, and blew well afterward
Until the coals began to burn fast.
"Now give us drink," said the canon then;
"Soon all shall be well, I guarantee.
Sit we down, and let us make merry."
And when this canon's beech coal
Was burned, all the filings out of the hole
Into the crucible fell right down;
And so it must be necessarily, by reason,
Since it was placed so exactly above.
But of this the priest knew nothing, alas!
He thought all the coals equally good,
For he understood nothing of that trick.
And when this alchemist saw his time,
"Rise up," said he, "sir priest, and stand by me;
And because I know well you have no ingot,
Go, walk forth, and bring a chalk stone;
For I will make it of the same shape
As is an ingot, if I may have such luck.
And bring also with you a bowl or a pan
Full of water, and you shall see well then
How our business shall thrive and succeed.
And yet, so that you shall have no suspicion
Nor wrong opinion of me in your absence,
I will not be out of your presence,
But go with you and come with you again."
The chamber door, shortly to say,
They opened and shut, and went their way.
And forth with them they carried the key,
And came back again without any delay.
Why should I tarry all the long day?
He took the chalk and shaped it in the manner
Of an ingot, as I shall tell you.
I say, he took out of his own sleeve
A small bar of silver -- may he have evil luck! --
Which was not more than an ounce of weight.
And pay attention now to his cursed trick!
He shaped his ingot in the length and in the breadth
Of this small bar, without any doubt,
So slyly that the priest did not see it, 
And in his sleeve again he did hide it,
And from the fire he took up his material,
And put it in the ingot with merry demeanor,
And in the pan of water he cast it,
When it pleased him, and commanded the priest quickly,
"See what is there; put in thy hand and grope.
Thou shalt find there silver, as I believe."
What else, devil of hell, should it be?
Shaving of silver is silver, by God!
He put his hand in and took up a small bar
Of pure silver, and glad in every vein
Was this priest, when he saw it was so.
"God's blessing, and his mother's also,
And all saints, have you (in their protection), sir canon,"
Said the priest, "and may I have their curse,
But, if you condescend to teach me
This noble craft and this esoteric art,
I will be yours in all that ever I can."
Said the canon, "Yet I will make trial 
The second time, that you may pay attention
And be expert concerning this, and when you are in need
Some other day in my absence to try out
This discipline and this ingenious science.
Let's take another ounce," said he then,
"Of quicksilver, without more words,
And do therewith as you have done before this
With that other, which now is silver."
This priest busies himself in all that he knows how
To do as this canon, this cursed man,
Commanded him, and blew hard on the fire,
In order to come to the realization of his desire.
And this canon, at exactly the same time,
Was all ready to beguile this priest again,
And for show in his hand he bore
A hollow stick -- pay attention and beware! --
In the end of which an ounce, and no more,
Of silver filings was put, as before
Was in his coal, and well sealed shut with wax
To keep in his filings every bit.
And while this priest was busy with his work,
This canon with his stick began to go
To him right away, and his powder cast in
As he did before-- the devil out of his skin
Flay him, I pray to God, for his falsehood!
For he was ever false in thought and deed --
And with this stick, above the crucible,
That was prepared with that false contrivance,
He stirred the coals until it began to melt
The wax next to the fire, as every man,
Unless he be a fool, knows well it must by necessity,
And all that was in the stick went out,
And into the crucible it quickly fell.
Now, good sirs, what more will you have?
When this priest was thus beguiled again,
Supposing nothing but truth, sooth to say,
He was so glad that I can not express
In any manner his mirth and his gladness;
And to the canon he offered again
Body and possessions. "Yes," quickly said the canon,
"Though I be poor, thou shalt find me skilfull.
I warn thee, there is yet more to come.
Is there any copper here?" said he.
"Yes," said the priest, "sir, I believe well there is some."
"Otherwise go buy us some, and do that quickly;
Now, good sir, go forth thy way and hurry thee."
He went his way, and with the copper came back,
And this canon took it in his hands,
And of that copper weighed out only an ounce.
All too simple is my tongue to pronounce,
As servant of my wit, the duplicity
Of this canon, root of all cursedness!
He seemed friendly to those that did not know him,
But he was fiendish both in deed and thought.
It wearies me to tell of his falseness,
And nonetheless I will yet express it,
With the intention that men may be warned by this,
And for no other cause, truly.
He put this ounce of copper in the crucible,
And on the fire quickly he has set it,
And cast in powder, and made the priest to blow,
And in his working to stoop low,
As he did before -- and all was nothing but a trick;
Exactly as he wished, he made the priest his ape!
And afterward he cast the ingot in it,
And put it at the last into the pan 
Of water, and in he put his own hand,
And in his sleeve (as you before-hand
Heard me tell) he had a small bar of silver.
He slyly took it out, this cursed rascal,
This priest not knowing of his false craft,
And in the pan's bottom he has left it;
And in the water groped noisily about to and fro,
And wonderfully secretly took up also 
The copper bar, this priest not knowing,
And hid it, and grabbed him by his coat,
And to him spoke, and thus said jokingly:
"Stoop down. By God, you are to blame!
Help me now, as I did you before;
Put in your hand, and see what is there."
This priest quickly took up this silver bar,
And then said the canon, "Let us go
With these three bars, which we have wrought,
To some goldsmith and learn if they are worth anything,
For, by my faith, I would not (have them), for (the cost of) my hood,
Unless they be silver pure and good,
And that very quickly shall be tested."
Unto the goldsmith with these three bars
They went and put these bars to the test
Of fire and hammer; no man could say nay,
But that they were as they ought to be.
This deluded priest, who was gladder than he?
Was never bird more glad at daybreak,
Nor nightingale in the season of May,
Was never none that was more eager to sing;
Nor lady more enthusiastic in singing carols to spring,
Or to speak of love and womanhood,
Nor knight in arms to do a hardy deed,
To stand in the good graces of his dear lady,
Than this priest had to learn this sorry craft.
And to the canon thus he spoke and said:
"For love of God, Who died for us all,
And as I may deserve (to have) it from you,
What shall this recipe cost? Tell now!"
"By our Lady," said this canon, "it is expensive,
I warn you well; for except for me and a friar,
There is no man in England who can make it."
"No matter," said he, "now, sir, for God's sake,
What shall I pay? Tell me, I pray."
"Indeed," said he, "as I say, it is very expensive.
Sir, at one word, if thou want to have it,
You must pay forty pounds, so help me God!
And were it not for the act of friendship that before this you did
To me, you should pay more, indeed."
This priest right away the sum of forty pounds 
Of nobles fetched, and gave every one of them
To this canon for this same recipe.
All his working was nothing but fraud and deceit.
"Sir priest," he said, "I do not care to have fame
For my craft, for I would that it were kept confidential;
And, as you love me, keep it secret.
For, if men knew of all my esoteric skill,
By God, they would have so great envy
Of me because of my science
I should be dead; there would be no other way."
"God forbid it," said the priest, "what say you?
Yet would I rather spend all the wealth
That I have, and otherwise I would rather go mad,
Than that you should fall in such distress."
"For your good will, sir, you have givem right good proof,"
Said the canon, "and farewell, many thanks!"
He went his way, and never the priest him saw
After that day; and when this priest should
At such time as he wanted, make a trial 
Of this recipe, farewell! It would not work.
Lo, thus tricked and beguiled was he!
Thus he makes his introductory gambit,
To bring folk to their destruction.
Consider, sirs, how, in each social rank,
Betwixt men and gold there is conflict 
So widespread that there is hardly any gold left.
This transmutation blinds so many a one
That in good faith I believe that it is
The greatest cause of such scarcity.
Philosophers speak so mystically
About this craft that men can not come to it,
For any wit that men have now-a-days.
They may well chatter as do jays,
And in their technical terms set their desire and pain,
But to their purpose shall they never attain.
A man can easily learn, if he have anything,
To transmute metals, and bring his wealth to nothing!
Lo! such a profit is in this pleasing game,
It will turn a man's mirth into sorrow,
And empty also great and heavy purses,
And make folk to deserve curses
Of those who have lent their wealth for that purpose.
O, fie, for shame! Those who have been burned,
Alas, can they not flee the fire's heat?
You who use it, I advise you let it go,
Lest you lose all; for late is better than never.
Never to thrive would be too long a time.
Though you search forever, you shall never find it.
You are as heedless as is Bayard the blind horse,
That blunders forth and takes account of no peril.
He is as likely to run against a stone
As to go around it in the road.
So fare you who multiply, I say.
If your eyes can not see clearly,
See that your mind lacks nothing of its sight.
For though you look never so broadly and stare,
You shall gain nothing on that transaction,
But waste all that you can steal and carry away.
Withdraw the fire, lest it burn too fast;
Meddle no more with that art, I mean,
For if you do, your prosperity is completely gone.
And very quickly I will you tell here
What alchemists say in this matter.
Lo, thus says Arnold of the New Town,
As his book Rosari makes mention;
He says right thus, without any lie:
"There is no man who can harden mercury 
Unless it be with his brother's knowledge";
Although he who first said this thing
Was father of philosophers, Hermes Trismegistus;
He says that the dragon, doubtless,
Does not die unless he be slain
By his brother; and that is to say,
By the dragon, Mercury, and none other
He understood, and brimstone by his brother,
That out of Sol (gold) and Luna (silver) were drawn.
"And therefore," said he -- take heed of my words --
"Let no man busy himself to seek this art,
Unless he the meaning and speech
Of alchemists can understand;
And if he do, he is an ignorant man.
For this science and this cunning," said he,
"Concerns the secret of the secrets, by God."
Also there was a disciple of Plato,
That one time said to his master,
As his book Senior will bear witness,
And this was his question in truth:
"Tell me the name of the secret stone."
And Plato answered unto him straightaway,
"Take the stone that men name Titanos."
"What is that?" said he. "Magnesia is the same,"
Said Plato. "Yes, sir, and is it thus?
This is explaining the unknown by the more unknown.
What is Magnesia, good sir, I pray you?"
"It is a liquid that is made, I say,
Of the four elements," said Plato.
Good sir," said he then, "Tell me the basic constituent
"Of that liquid, if it be your wish."
"Nay, nay," said Plato, "certainly, that I will not.
The alchemists were sworn every single one
That they should reveal it unto no one,
Nor in any book write it in any way.
For unto Christ it is so beloved and dear
That He does not wish that it be discovered,
Except where it is pleasing to his deity
To enlighten men, and also to forbid
Whomever he pleases; lo, this is the end."
Then I conclude thus, since God of heaven
Does not wish that the alchemists should tell
How a man shall come unto this stone,
I advise, as for the best, let it go.
For whoever makes God his adversary,
As to do any thing in contrary
To his will, certainly, never shall he thrive,
Though he practice alchemy all his life.
And there (put) a period, for my tale is ended.
God send every true man remedy for his troubles!
But one word, lords, hear before I go:
It would be very difficult to find now-a-days
In all the town Griseldas three or two;
For if they were put to such tests,
The gold of them has now been so badly debased
With brass, that though the coin be fair to look at,
It would rather break in two than bend.
For which here, for the love of the Wife of Bath --
Whose life and all her sect may God maintain
In high mastery, and otherwise it would be a pity --
I will with lusty heart, fresh and vigorous,
Say you a song to make you happy, I believe;
And let us stint of serious matter.
Hear my song that says in this manner:
Griselda is dead, and also her patience,
And both together buried in Italy;
For which I cry in the hearing of all
No wedded man so bold be to test
His wife's patience trusting to find
Griselda, for certainly he shall faille.
O noble wives, full of great prudence,
Let no humility nail down your tongue,
Nor let any clerk have cause or eagerness
To write about you a story of such marvel
As of patient and kind Griselda,
Lest Chichevache swallow you in her entrails!
Follow Echo, who holds no silence,
But ever answers in reply.
Be not fooled because of your innocence,
But eagerly take the governance to yourself.
Imprint well this lesson in your mind,
Since it may work to the benefit of all.
You arch-wives, stand ready for battle,
Since you are strong as is a great camel;
Suffer not that men do offense to you.
And slender wives, feeble in battle,
Be fierce as is a tiger yonder in India;
Ever wag your tongues like a windmill, I you advise.
Fear them not; do them no reverence,
For though thy husband be armed in mail,
The arrows of thy spiteful eloquence
Shall pierce his breast and also his neck-guard.
In jealousy I advise also that thou bind him,
And thou shalt make him cower as does a quail.
If thou be fair, where folk are present,
Show thou thy visage and thy apparel;
If thou be ugly, be lavish in thy expenditures;
To get thee friends always work hard;
Be ever in behavior as light as a leaf on a linden tree,
And let him grieve, and weep, and wring his hands, and wail!
[When ended was the tale of this worthy Clerk,
Our Host said, and swore, "By God's bones,
I would rather than have a barrel of ale
My wife at home had heard this legend once!
This is a fine tale for this occasion,
For my purposes, if you knew my will;
But thing that will not be, let it be still."]
Oh Lord, our Lord, how marvelous thy name 
Is spread in this large world -- said she --
For not only thy precious praise
Is performed by men of dignity,
But by the mouths of children thy goodness
Is made known, for on the breast sucking
Sometimes they show thy praise.
Therefore in praise, as I best know how or can,
Of thee and of the white lily flour
That bore thee, and is a maid always,
To tell a story I will do my labor;
Not that I may increase her honor,
For she herself is honor and the root
Of goodness, next to her Son, and soul's remedy.
Oh mother Maiden, Oh generous maiden and Mother!
Oh bush unburned, burning in Moses' sight,
That ravished down from the Deity,
Through thy humility, the Ghost that alighted in thee, 
By whose power, when he illuminated thy heart,
The Father's Wisdom was conceived,
Help me to tell it in thy reverence!
Lady, thy goodness, thy magnificence,
Thy virtue and thy great humility
There can no tongue express in (the language of) any science;
For sometimes, Lady, ere men pray to thee,
Thou goest before because of thy kindliness,
And gettest us the light, by thy prayer,
To guide us unto thy Son so dear.
My ability is so weak, Oh blissful Queen,
To declare thy great worthiness
That I can not sustain the weight;
But as a child of twelve months old, or less,
That can hardly express any word,
Right so I do, and therefore I pray to you,
Guide my song that I shall say of you.
There was in Asia, in a great city,
Among Christian folk a Ghetto,
Sustained by a lord of that country
For foul usury and shameful profits,
Hateful to Christ and to his company;
And through the street men might ride or go,
For it was free and open at either end.
A little school of Christian folk there stood
Down at the farther end, in which there were
A good many children, descended from Christian blood,
That learned in that school year by year
Such sort of doctrine as men used there,
This is to say, to sing and to read,
As small children do in their childhood.
Among these children was a widow's son,
A little schoolboy, seven years of age,
Whose custom was day by day to go to school,
And in addition, moreover, where he saw the image
Of Christ's mother, he had the practice,
As was taught to him, to kneel down and say
His `Hail Mary,' as he goes by the way.
Thus this widow has taught her little son 
Our blissful Lady, Christ's dear mother,
To worship always, and he forgot it not,
For an innocent child will always quickly learn.
But always, when I think about this matter,
Saint Nicholas stands ever in my mind,
Because he so young did reverence to Christ.
This little child, learning his little book,
As he sat in the school at his primer,
He heard `Gracious (mother) of the Redeemer' being sung,
As children learned their antiphonal hymns;
And as he dared, he drew him nearer and nearer,
And listened always to the words and the notes,
Until he knew the first verse entirely by heart.
He knew not what this Latin meant,
For he was so young and tender of age.
But on one day he did pray his fellow
To explain to him this song in his language,
Or tell him why this song was in regular use;
This he prayed him to translate and explain
Very frequently upon his bare knees.
His fellow, who was older than he,
Answered him thus: "This song, I have heard tell,
Was composed about our generous blissful Lady,
To salute her, and also to pray her 
To be our help and succour when we die.
I can explain no more of this matter.
I learn song; I know but little grammar."
"And is this song composed in reverence
Of Christ's mother?" said this innocent.
"Now, certainly, I will do my best efforts
To learn it all before Christmas is gone.
Though I for my primer shall be punished
And shall be beaten thrice in an hour,
I will learn it to honor Our Lady!"
His fellow privately taught him (as they went) homeward,
From day to day, until he knew it by heart,
And then he sang it well and boldly,
From word to word, in harmony with the tune.
Twice a day it passed through his throat,
When he went toward school and homeward;
On Christ's mother his mind was set.
As I have said, throughout the Ghetto
This little child, as he came to and fro,
Very merrily then would he sing and cry
Always `O Gracious (mother) of the Redeemer'
So pierced his heart the sweetness 
Of Christ's mother that, to pray to her,
He can not stop singing by the way.
Our first foe, the serpent Satan,
That has his wasp's nest in Jews' hearts,
Swelled up, and said, "Oh Hebraic people, alas!
Is this a thing that is honorable to you,
That such a boy shall walk as he pleases
In scorn of you, and sing of such a subject,
Which is against your law's (due) reverence?"
From thenceforth the Jews have conspired
To drive this innocent out of this world.
For this they have hired a murderer, 
Who in an alley had a secret place;
And as the child began to pass by,
This cursed Jew seized him, and held him tightly,
And cut his throat, and cast him in a pit.
I say that they threw him in a privy 
Where these Jews purge their entrails.
Oh cursed folk of new Herods, 
What may your evil intent avail you?
Murder will come out, certainly, it will not fail,
And especially where the honor of God shall spread;
The blood cries out on your cursed deed.
Oh martyr, firmly united to virginity,
Now canst thou sing, following continuously
The white celestial Lamb -- said she --
Of which the great evangelist, Saint John,
In Pathmos wrote, who says that they that go
Before this Lamb and sing a song all new,
(Are) those who never, in a carnal way, knew women.
This poor widow waits all that night
For her little child, but he came not;
For which, as soon as it was daylight,
With face pale from dread and intense thought,
She has sought him at school and elsewhere,
Until finally she got so far as to discover
That he was last seen in the Ghetto.
With mother's pity enclosed in her breast,
She goes, as if she were half out of her mind,
To every place where she has supposed
Most likely to find her little child;
And ever on Christ's meek and kind mother
She cried, and at the last thus she acted:
Among the cursed Jews she sought him.
She asks and she prays piteously
To every Jew that dwelt in that same place,
To tell her if her child at all went by there.
They said "nay"; but Jesus of his grace
Gave it in her thought within a short while
So that she cried for her son in that place,
Where he was cast in a pit near by.
Oh great God, who performest thy praise
By mouths of innocents, lo, here is thy power!
This gem of chastity, this emerald,
And also the bright ruby of martyrdom,
Where he with throat carved lay on his back,
He `Gracious (mother) of the Redeemer' began to sing
So loud that all the place began to ring.
The Christian folk who went through the street
Came in to wonder upon this thing,
And hastily they sent for the magistrate;
He came quickly without tarrying,
And praises Christ who is king of heaven,
And also his mother, honor of mankind,
And after that he had the Jews bound.
This child with piteous lamentation
Was taken up, singing his song always,
And with the honor of a great procession
They carry him unto the nearby abbey.
His mother swooning lay by his bier;
The people that were there could hardly 
Bring this new Rachel from his bier.
With torment and with shameful death for each one,
This magistrate had these Jews put to death  
Who knew of this murder, and that immediately.
He would not tolerate any such cursedness.
"Evil shall have what evil will deserve";
Therefore with wild horses he had them torn apart,
And after that he hanged them by the law.
Upon this bier always lies this innocent
Before the chief altar, while the masse lasted;
And after that, the abbot with his convent
Have hurried to bury him very quickly;
And when they cast holy water on him,
Yet spoke this child, when holy water was sprinkled,
And sang `O Gracious (mother) of the Redeemer!'
This abbot, who was a holy man,
As monks are -- or else ought to be --
He began to entreat this young child,
And said, "Oh dear child, I beseech thee,
By power of the holy Trinity,
Tell me what is thy cause to sing,
Since thy throat is cut as it seems to me?"
"My throat is cut unto my neck boon,"
Said this child, "and in the natural course of events
I should have dyed, yea, a long time ago.
But Jesus Christ, as you find in books,
Desires that his glory should last and be in mind,
And for the worship of his Mother dear
Yet can I sing `O Gracious (mother)' loud and clear.
"This well of mercy, Christ's sweet mother,
I loved always, according to my ability,
And when I had to lose my life,
She came to me, and told me to sing
This anthem truly as I was dying,
As you have heard, and when I had sung,
It seemed to me that she laid a grain upon my tongue.
"Therefore I sing, and must sing certainly,
In honor of that blissful generous Maiden
Until the grain is taken off my tongue;
And after that thus she said to me:
`My little child, at that time I will fetch thee,
When the grain is taken from thy tongue.
Be not afraid; I will not forsake thee.'"
This holy monk, this abbot, I mean him,
His tongue pulled out, and took away the grain,
And he gave up the ghost very gently.
And when this abbot had seen this wonder,
His salt tears trickled down like rain,
And face-down he fell all flat upon the ground,
And still he lay as if he had been bound.
The convent also lay on the pavement
Weeping, and praising Christ's dear mother,
And after that they rise, and forth are gone,
And took away this martyr from his bier;
And in a tomb of clear marble stones 
They enclose his sweet little body.
There he is now, God grant us to meet!
Oh young Hugh of Lincoln, slain also
By cursed Jews, as it is well known,
For it is but a little while ago,
Pray also for us, we sinful folk unstable,
That of his mercy God so merciful
Multiply his great mercy on us,
For reverence of his mother Mary. Amen
This Summoner in his stirrups stood high;
Upon this Friar his heart was so enraged
That like an aspen leaf he quaked for ire.
"Gentlemen," said he, "but one thing I desire;
I you beseech that, of your courtesy,
Since you have heard this false Friar lie,
Now grant me that me I may tell my tale.
This Friar boasts that he knows hell,
And God knows it, that it is little wonder;
Friars and fiends are but little different.
For, by God, you have often times heard tell
How a friar was carried off to hell
In spirit once by a vision;
And as an angel led him up and down,
To show him the pains that were there,
In all the place saw he not a friar;
Of other folk he saw enough in woe.
Unto this angel spoke the friar then:
`Now, sir,' said he, `have friars such a grace
That none of them shall come to this place?'
`Yes' said this angel, `many a million!'
And unto Satan he led him down.
`And now has Satan,' says he, `a tail
Broader than of a large galleon is the sail.
Hold up thy tail, thou Satan!' said he;
`Show forth thy ass, and let the friar see
Where the nest of friars is in this place!'
And before half a furlong way of time (a few minutes),
Just as bees swarm out from a hive,
Out of the devil's ass there began to rush
Twenty thousand friars in a crowd,
And throughout hell swarmed all about,
And came back again as fast as they can go,
And in his ass they crept every one.
He clapped his tail again and lay very still.
This friar, when he had looked his fill
Upon the torments of this sorry place,
His spirit God restored, by his grace,
Unto his body again, and he awoke.
But nonetheless, for fear yet he quaked,
So was the devil's ass always in his mind,
That is his true natural heritage.
God save you all, except this cursed Friar!
My prologue will I end in this manner."
Gentlemen, there is in Yorkshire, as I believe,
A marshy country called Holdernesse,
In which there went a licensed beggar about
To preach, and also to beg, it is no doubt.
And so befell that on a day this friar
Had preached at a church in his manner,
And specially, above every thing,
Excited he the people in his preaching
To masses for dead souls, and to give, for God's sake,
The wherewithal that men might holy houses make,
Where divine service is honored,
Not where it is wasted and devoured,
Nor where it needs not to be given,
As to beneficed clergymen, that may live,
Thanked be God, in prosperity and abundance.
"Masses for souls," said he, "deliver from penance
Their friends' souls, as well old as young --
Yes, when they are hastily sung,
Not to keep a priest jolly and gay --
He sings not but one masse in a day.
Deliver out," said he, "immediately the souls!
Very hard it is with flesh hook or with awls
To be clawed, or to burn or bake.
Now speed you hastily, for Christ's sake!"
And when this friar had said all he intended,
With the prayer "who with the father" forth he went his way.
When folk in church had given him what they wished,
He went his way; no longer would he stay.
With satchel and metal-tipped staff, his robe tucked up high,
In every house he began to peer and pry,
And begs meal and cheese, or else grain.
His fellow had a staff tipped with horn,
A pair of tablets all of ivory,
And a writing instrument polished carefully,
And wrote the names always, as he stood,
Of all folk that gave him any good thing,
As if he would for them pray.
"Give us a bushel of wheat, malt, or rye,
A little cake, or a bit of cheese,
Or else what you like, we may not choose;
A God's halfpenny, or a mass penny,
Or give us some of your meat, if you have any;
A piece of your woolen cloth, dear lady,
Our sister dear -- lo! Here I write your name --
Bacon or beef, or such thing as you find."
A sturdy rascal went always behind them,
Who was their host's man, and bore a sack,
And what men gave them, laid it on his back.
And when he was out at door, immediately
He planed away the names every one
That he before had written in his tables;
He served them with tricks and with falsehoods.
"Nay, there thou lie, thou Summoner!" said the Friar.
"Quiet," said our Host, "for Christ's mother dear!
Tell forth thy tale, and spare it not at al."
"As I may thrive," said this Summoner, "so I shall!"
So long he went, house by house, until he
Came to a house where he was accustomed to be
Hospitably received more than in a hundred places.
Sick lay the good man whose the place is;
Bedridden upon a couch low he lay.
"God be here!" said he, "Oh Thomas, friend, good day!"
Said this friar, courteously and soft.
"Thomas," said he, "God reward you! Very often
Have I upon this bench fared full well;
Here have I eaten many a merry meal."
And from the bench he drove away the cat,
And laid down his walking stick and his hat,
And also his satchel, and set him softly down.
His fellow had gone walking into town
Forth with his knave, into that hostelry
Where he intended that night to lie.
"Oh dear master," said this sick man,
"How have you fared since March began?
I saw you not this fortnight or more."
"God knows," said he, "labored I have very hard,
And especially for thy salvation
Have I said many a precious prayer,
And for our other friends, God them bless!
I have today been at your church at mass,
And said a sermon insofar as my simple wit allowed --
Not entirely according to the text of holy writ,
For it is hard for you, as I suppose,
And therefore will I teach you all the interpretation.
Interpreting scripture is a glorious thing, certainly,
For letter slays, so we clerks say --
There have I taught them to be charitable,
And spend their goods where it is reasonable;
And there I saw our lady -- Ah! Where is she?"
"Yonder in the yard I believe that she be,"
Said this man, "and she will come anon."
"Ey, master, welcome are you, by Saint John!"
Said this wife, "How fare you, cordially (I ask)?"
The friar arises up full courteously,
And her embraces in his arms tightly,
And kissed her sweetly, and chirps like a sparrow
With his lips: "Lady," said he, "right well,
As he who is your servant every bit,
Thanked be God, who gave you soul and life!
Yet saw I not this day so fair a wife
In all the church, as God may save me!"
"Yes, God correct my faults, sir," said she.
"At any rate, welcome are you, by my faith!"
"Great thanks, lady, this have I found always.
But of your great goodness, by your leave,
I would pray you that you be not annoyed,
I will with Thomas speak a little while.
These curates are very negligent and slow
To examine gently a conscience
In confession; in preaching is my diligence,
And study in Peter's words and in Paul's.
I walk and fish Christian men's souls
To pay Jesus Christ his proper income;
To spread his word is set all my intention."
"Now, by your leave, oh dear sir," said she,
"Chide him well, for the Holy Trinity!
He is as angry as a pismire,
Though he have all that he can desire;
Though I cover him at night and make him warm,
And over him lay my leg or my arm,
He groans like our boor, that lies in our sty.
Other pleasure right none of him have I;
I can not please him in any sort of way."
"Oh Thomas, I tell you, Thomas! Thomas!
This makes the fiend; this must be amended.
Ire is a thing that high God forbad,
And thereof will I speak a word or two."
"Now, master," said the wife, "before I go,
What will you dine? I will go work on that."
"Now, lady," said he, "now I tell you without doubt
Have I of a capon only the liver,
And of your soft breed nothing but a sliver,
And after that a roasted pig's head --
But that I would that no beast for me were dead --
Then had I with you enough plain food.
I am a man who needs little sustenance;
My spirit has its nourishment in the Bible.
The body is always so ready and accustomed
To staying awake (to pray), that my stomach is destroyed.
I pray you, lady, that you be not annoyed,
Though I so friendly show you my private affairs.
By God! I would not tell it but to a few."
"Now, sir," said she, "but one word before I go.
My child is dead within these weeks two,
Soon after you went out of this town."
"His death saw I by revelation,"
Said this friar, "at home in our dormitory.
I dare well say that, before half an hour
After his death, I saw him carried up to bliss
In my vision, as God may guide me!
So did our sacristan and the head of our infirmary,
That have been true friars fifty years;
They may now -- God be thanked of his grace! --
Make their fiftieth anniversary and walk alone.
And up I rose, and all our convent as well,
With many a tear tricking on my cheek,
Without noise or clattering of bells;
Te Deum was our song, and nothing else,
Except that to Christ I said a prayer,
Thanking him for his revelation.
For, sir and lady, trust me right well,
Our prayers are more effectual,
And more we see of Christ's secret things,
Than secular folk, although they were kings.
We live in poverty and in abstinence,
And secular folk in riches and expenditures
Of food and drink, and in their foul delight.
We hold this world's lust all in scorn.
Lazar and Dives lived diversely,
And diverse rewards had they thereby.
Whoever will pray, he must fast and be pure,
And fatten his soul, and make his body lean.
We fare as says the apostle; cloth and food
Suffice us, though they are not full good.
The purity and the fasting of us friars
Makes that Christ accepts our prayers.
"Lo, Moses forty days and forty nights
Fasted, before the high God of might
Spoke with him in the mountain of Sinai.
With empty belly, fasting many a day,
Received he the law that was written
With God's finger; and Elijah, you know well,
In mount Horeb, before he had any speech
With high God, who is our life's physician,
He fasted long and was in meditation.
"Aaron, who had the temple in governance,
And also the other priests every one,
Into the temple when they should go
To pray for the people and do service,
They would not drink in any sort of way
Any drink which might make them drunk,
But there in abstinence pray and keep vigil,
Lest they died. Take heed what I say!
Unless they are sober who for the people pray,
Beware that -- I say no more, for it suffices.
"Our Lord Jesus, as holy writ devises,
Gave us an example of fasting and prayers.
Therefore we mendicants, we innocent friars,
Are wedded to poverty and chastity,
To charity, humility, and abstinence,
To persecution for righteousness,
To weeping, charity, and purity.
And therefore may you see that our prayers --
I speak of us, we mendicants, we friars --
Are to the high God more acceptable
Than yours, with your feasts at the table.
From Paradise first, if I shall not lie,
Was man chased out for his gluttony;
And chaste was man in Paradise, certainly.
"But hearken now, Thomas, what I shall say.
I have no text for it, as I suppose,
But I shall find it in some sort of gloss (interpretation),
That especially our sweet Lord Jesus
Spoke this about friars, when he said thus:
`Blessed are they who are poor in spirit.'
And so forth all the gospel may you see,
Whether it is more like our profession,
Or theirs who swim in possessions.
Fie on their pomp and on their gluttony!
And for their ignorance I scorn them.
"I think they are like Jovinian,
Fat as a whale, and waddling like a swan,
As full of wine as a bottle in the pantry.
Their prayer is of full great reverence,
When they for souls say the psalm of David:
Lo, `buf!' they say (belch), `my heart has uttered' (a good word)!
Who follows Christ's gospel and his path,
But we who are humble, and chaste, and poor,
Workers of God's word, not mere listeners?
Therefore, just as a hawk upon an upward flight
Up springs into the' air, right so prayers
Of charitable and chaste busy friars
Make their upward flight to God's two ears.
Thomas, Thomas! As I may ride or walk,
And by that lord who is called Saint Yve,
Were thou not our brother, thou shouldest not thrive.
In our assembly we pray day and night
To Christ, that he send thee health and strength
Thy body to move with ease hastily."
"God knows," said he, "no thing thereof feel I!
So help me Christ, I in few years,
Have spent upon different sorts of friars
Very many a pound; yet fare I never the better.
Certainly, I have almost spent all my goods.
Farewell, my gold, for it is all gone!"
The friar answered, "Oh Thomas, dost thou so?
Why do you need to seek various friars?
Why does one who has a perfect physician need
To seek other physicians in the town?
Your inconstancy is your ruin.
Consider you then me, or else our convent,
To be insufficient to pray for you?
Thomas, that trick is not worth a half a farthing.
Your malady is because we have too little.
Ah, give that convent half a quarter (four bushels) oats!
A, give that convent four and twenty groats (four pences)!
A, give that friar a penny, and let him go!
Nay, nay, Thomas, it may in no way be so!
What is a farthing worth divided into twelve?
Lo, each thing that is united in itself
Is more strong than when it is all scattered.
Thomas, by me thou shalt not be flattered;
Thou wouldest have our labor all for nothing.
The high God, who all this world has wrought,
Says that the workman is worthy of his hire.
Thomas, I do not desire any of your treasure
For myself, but because all our convent
To pray for you is always so diligent,
And to build Christ's own church.
Thomas, if you want to learn what to do,
Concerning building up of churches you can find
If it be good in the life of Thomas of India.
You lie here full of anger and of ire,
With which the devil set your heart afire,
And chide here the poor innocent,
Your wife, who is so meek and patient.
And therefore, Thomas, believe me if thou wish,
Strive not with thy wife, for thine own good;
And bear this word away now, by thy faith;
Concerning such thing, lo, what the wise man says:
`Within thy house be thou no lion;
To thy subjects do no oppression,
Nor make thy acquaintances to flee.'
And, Thomas, yet again I command thee,
Beware of Ire that in thy bosom sleeps;
Beware of the serpent that so slyly creeps
Under the grass and stings subtly.
Beware, my son, and hearken patiently
That twenty thousand men have lost their lives
For striving with their sweethearts and their wives.
Now since you have so holy meek a wife,
Why do you need, Thomas, to make strife?
There is, indeed, no serpent so cruel,
When man treads on his tail, nor half so fierce,
As woman is, when she has become angry;
Vengeance is then all that they desire.
Ire is a sin, one of the greatest of seven,
Abominable unto the God of heaven;
And to himself it is destruction.
This every ignorant vicar or parson
Can say, how ire engenders homicide.
Ire is, in truth, executor of pride.
I could of ire say so much sorrow,
My tale should last until to-morrow.
And therefore pray I God both day and night
An angry man, God send him little power!
It is great harm and certainly great pity
To set an angry man in high position.
"Once there was an angry potentate,
As says Seneca, who, during his reign,
Upon a day out rode two knights,
And as Fortune would that it were so,
That one of them came home, that other did not.
At once the knight is brought before the judge,
Who said thus, `Thou hast thy fellow slain,
For which I condemn thee to the death, certainly.'
And to another knight commanded he,
`Go lead him to the death, I charge thee.'
And it happened, as they went by the way
Toward the place where he should die,
The knight came who men believed had been dead.
Then thought they it would be the best plan
To lead them both to the judge again.
They said, `Lord, the knight has not slain
His fellow; here he stands whole and alive.'
`You shall be dead,' said he, `as I may thrive!
That is to say, both one, and two, and three!'
And to the first knight right thus spoke he,
`I condemned thee; thou must therefore be dead.
And thou also must of necessity lose thy head,
For thou art the cause why thy fellow dies.'
And to the third knight right thus he says,
`Thou hast not done what I commanded thee.'
And thus he caused them all three to be slain.
"Angry Cambises was also a drunkard,
And it always delighted him to be a scoundrel.
And as it happened, a lord of his household
Who loved virtuous morality
Said on a day betwixt them two right thus:
"`A lord is lost, if he be vicious;
And drunkenness is also a foul reputation
Of any man, and especially in a lord.
There is full many an eye and many an ear
Watching a lord, and he knows not where.
For God's love, drink more temperately!
Wine makes man to lose wretchedly
His mind and also his limbs every one.'
"`The reverse shalt thou see,' said he, `right now,
And prove it by thy own experience,
That wine does to folk no such offence.
There is no wine that deprives me of my power
Of hand nor foot, nor of my eyesight.'
And for spite he drank very much more,
By a hundred times, than he had done before;
And right away this angry, cursed wretch
Had this knight's son fetched before him,
Commanding him he should before him stand.
And suddenly he took his bow in hand,
And up the string he pulled to his ear,
And with an arrow he slew the child right there.
`Now tell me whether I have a sure hand or not?'
Said he; `Is all my power and mind gone?
Has wine bereft me of my eyesight?'
Why should I tell the answer of the knight?
His son was slain; there is no more to say.
Beware, therefore, how you act with lords.
Sing 'I shall please' and `I shall, if I can,'
Unless it be unto a poor man.
To a poor man one should tell his vices,
But not to a lord, though he should go to hell.
"Lo angry Cyrus, that Persian,
How he destroyed the river of Gysen,
Because a horse of his was drowned therein,
When he went to conquer Babylon.
He made it that the river was so small
That women could wade it everywhere.
Lo, what said he who so well can teach?
`Be no fellow to an angry man,
Nor with no enraged man walk by the way,
Lest thee repent;' I will no further say.
"Now, Thomas, dear brother, leave thine ire;
Thou shalt me find as true as is a carpenter's square.
Hold not the devil's knife always at thy heart --
Thine anger causes thee all too sorely to suffer --
But show to me all thy confession."
"Nay," said the sick man, "by Saint Symoun!
I have been shriven this day by my curate.
I have him told completely all my condition;
It needs no more to speak of it," says he,
"Unless I so wish, out of my humility."
"Give me then of thy gold, to make our cloister,"
Said he, "for many a mussel and many an oyster,
When other men have been full well at ease,
Have been our food, our cloister to erect.
And yet, God knows, hardly the foundation
Is finished, nor of our pavement
There is not a tile yet within our dwelling.
By God, we owe forty pounds for stones.
"Now help, Thomas, for him who despoiled hell of its captives!
For otherwise we must sell our books.
And if you lack our preaching,
Then all the world goes to destruction.
For whoever would rob us from this world,
So save me God, Thomas, by your leave,
He would take the sun out of this world.
For who can teach and work as we know how?
And that is not of recent times," said he,
"But since Elijah was, or Elisha,
Have friars been -- that I find in the records --
In charity, thanked be our Lord!
Now Thomas, help, for holy charity!"
And down at once he set himself on his knee.
This sick man grew well nigh mad for ire;
He wished that the friar had been afire
With his false dissimulation.
"Such a thing as is in my possession,"
Said he, "that can I give, and none other.
You say me thus, that I am your brother?"
"Yes, certainly," said the friar, "trust well.
I gave our lady our letter with our seal."
"Well now," said he, "and something shall I give
Unto your holy convent while I live;
And in thy hand thou shalt it have right now,
On this condition, and none other,
That thou divide it so, my dear brother,
That every friar have as much as the other.
This shalt thou swear on thy religious vows,
Without fraud or quibbling."
"I swear it," said this friar, "by my faith!"
And therewith his hand in his he lays,
"Lo, have here my faith; I shall not fail (to keep my word)."
"Now then, put in thy hand down by my back,"
Said this man, "and grope well behind.
Beneath my buttock where shalt thou find
A thing that I have hidden in private."
"Ah!" thought this friar, "That shall go with me!"
And down his hand he thrusts to the cleft
In hope to find there a gift.
And when this sick man felt this friar
About his anus grope there and here,
Amid his hand he let the friar a fart;
There is no horse, pulling a cart,
That could have let a fart of such a sound.
The friar up started as does a mad lion --
"Ah, false churl," said he, "for God's bones!
This hast thou done on purpose for spite.
Thou shalt pay for this fart, if I can (do so)!"
His servants, who heard this affray,
Came leaping in and chased out the friar;
And forth he goes, with a very angry look,
And fetched his fellow, where lay his store.
He looked like a wild boar;
He gnashed his teeth, he was so angry.
At a rapid pace down to the court he goes,
Where there dwelt a man of greet honor,
To whom he was always confessor.
This worthy man was lord of that village.
This friar came as if he were in a rage,
Where the lord sat eating at his table;
Hardly could the friar speak a word,
Until at the last he said, "God you see!"
This lord did look, and said, "Bless me!
What, friar John, what sort of carrying on is this?
I see well that there is something amiss;
You look as if the wood were full of thieves.
Sit down right now, and tell me what your grief is,
And it shall be amended, if I can."
"I have," said he, "had an insult this day,
God reward you, down in your village,
That in this world is none so poor a servant boy
That he would not be nauseated
By what I have received in your town.
And yet there grieves me nothing so sore,
As that this old churl with white locks
Blasphemed has our holy convent as well."
"Now, master," said this lord, "I you beseech --"
"No master, sir," said he, "but servant,
Though I have had in school that honor.
God likes not that `Rabbi' men us call,
Neither in market nor in your large hall."
"No matter," said he, "but tell me all your grief."
"Sir," said this friar, "an odious mischief
This day has happened to my order and me,
And so, consequently, to each degree
Of holy church -- God amend it soon!"
"Sir," said the lord, "you know what is to be done.
Do not be angry; you are my confessor;
You are the salt of the earth and the delight.
For God's love, keep your patience!
Tell me your grief." And he straightway told him,
As you have heard before -- you know well what.
The lady of the house always still sat
Until she had heard what the friar said.
"Ey, God's mother," said she, "Blissful maid!
Is there anything else? Tell me faithfully."
"My lady," said he, "how think you of this?"
"How I think" said she. "So help me God,
I say a churl has done a churl's deed.
What should I say? God let him never prosper!
His sick head is full of foolishness;
I consider him in a sort of delirium."
"My lady," said he, "by God, I shall not lie,
Unless I can be avenged in another manner,
I shall defame him wherever I speak,
This false blasphemer who charged me
To divide that which will not be divided
Equally to every man, with bad luck (to him)!"
The lord sat still as if he were in a trance,
And in his heart he rolled up and down,
"How had this churl imagination
To show such a problem to the friar?
Never previously before now heard I of such a matter.
I believe the devil put it in his mind.
In the art of measuring (arithmetic) shall there no man find,
Before this day, such a problem.
Who should make a logical proof
That every man should have equally his part
As of the sound or odor of a fart?
Oh ingenious, proud churl, I curse his face!
Lo, sirs," said the lord, "with bad luck (to him)!
Who ever heard of such a thing before now?
To every man equally? Tell me how.
It is an impossibility; it can not be.
Ey, clever churl, God let him never prosper!
The rumbling of a fart, and every sound,
Is nothing but reverberation of air,
And ever it wastes away little by little.
There is no man can judge, by my faith,
If it were divided equally.
What, lo, my churl, lo, yet how shrewdly
Unto my confessor to-day he spoke!
I consider him certainly one possessed by a demon!
Now eat your food, and let the churl go play;
Let him go hang himself in the devil's name!"
Now stood the lord's squire at the board,
Who carved his meat, and heard word by word
Of all the things which I have told you.
"My lord," said he, "if you be not displeased,
I could tell, for a cloth to make a gown,
To you, sir friar, providing you be not angry,
How this fart should evenly be divided
Among your convent, if it pleased me."
"Tell," said the lord, "and thou shalt have straightway
A gown-cloth, by God and by Saint John!"
"My lord," said he, "when the weather is fair,
Without wind or disturbance of air,
Let a cartwheel be brought here into this hall;
But see that it has all its spokes --
Twelve spokes has a cartwheel commonly.
And bring me then twelve friars. Know you why?
For thirteen is a convent, as I believe.
Your confessor here, for his worthiness,
Shall complete the number of his convent.
Then shall they kneel down, all together,
And to every spoke's end, in this manner,
A friar shall very firmly lay his nose.
Your noble confessor -- may God him save! --
Shall hold his nose upright under the nave.
Then shall this churl, with belly stiff and taut
As any drum, hither be brought;
And set him right on the wheel of this cart,
Upon the nave, and make him let a fart.
And you shall see, on peril of my life (I swear),
By proof which is logical,
That equally the sound of it will go,
And also the stink, unto the spokes' ends,
Except that this worthy man, your confessor,
Because he is a man of greet honor,
Shall have the first fruit, as is reasonable.
The noble usage of friars yet is this,
The worthy men of them shall first be served;
And certainly he has it well deserved.
He has to-day taught us so much good
With preaching in the pulpit where he stood,
That I can affirm, I say for me,
He had the first smell of three farts;
And so would all his convent certainly (agree),
He bears him so faire and holily."
The lord, the lady, and each man, except the friar,
Said that Jankyn spoke, in this matter,
As well as Euclid or Ptolemy.
Concerning the churl, they said, shrewdness
And great intelligence made him speak as he spoke;
He is no fool, nor possessed by any demon.
And Jankyn has won a new gown --
My tale is done; we are almost at town.
