The Cook of London, while the Reeve spoke,
Was so happy he thought the Reeve scratched him on the back.
"Ha! ha!" said he, "For Christ's passion,
This miller had a sharp conclusion
To his logical argument about lodging!
Well said Salomon in his language,
`Do not bring every man into thy house,'
For providing lodging by night is perilous.
Well ought a man to take heed
Whom he brings into his private home.
I pray to God, give me sorrow and care
If ever, since I was called Roger of Ware,
I heard a miller better set to work (tricked).
He had a malicious trick played on him in the dark.
But God forbid that we stop here;
And therefore, if you agree to hear
A tale by me, who am a poor man,
I will tell you, as well as ever I can,
A little amusing affair that happened in our city."
Our Host answered and said, "I grant it to thee.
Now tell on, Roger; look that it be good,
For of many a pastry hast thou drawn out the gravy,
And many a Jack of Dover (a kind of pie) hast thou sold
That has been twice hot and twice cold.
Of many a pilgrim hast thou Christ's curse,
For of thy parsley yet they fare the worse,
Which they have eaten with thy stubble-fed goose,
For in thy shop is many a fly loose.
Now tell on, gentle Roger by thy name.
But yet I pray thee, be not angry about a joke;
A man may speak very truthfully in joking and play."
"Thou sayest the truth," said Roger, "by my faith!
But `a true jest is a bad jest,' as the Fleming says.
And therefore, Harry Bailly, by thy faith,
Be thou not angry, ere we depart here,
Even though my tale is of an inn-keeper.
But nonetheless I will not tell it yet;
But before we part, indeed, thou shalt be repaid."
And with that he laughed and made good cheer,
And told his tale, as you shall next hear. 
A apprentice once dwelt in our city,
And of a craft of food merchants was he.
Gaily dressed he was as is a goldfinch in the woods,
Brown as a berry, a good-looking short fellow,
With locks black, combed full elegantly.
He could dance so well and jollily
That he was called Perkin Reveler.
He was as full of love and womanizing
As is the hive full of honey sweet;
Happy was the wench who with him might meet.
At every wedding party he would sing and dance;
He loved the tavern better than the shop.
For when there was any procession in Cheapside,
Out of the shop thither would he leap --
Until that he had all the sight seen,
And danced well, he would not come back--
And gathered him a company of his sort
To dance and sing and make such merriment;
And there they agreed on a time to meet,
To play at dice in such and such a street.
For in the town there was no apprentice
That could better throw a pair of dice
Than Perkin could, and thereto he was free
In his spending, in a private place.
That found his master easily in his business accounts,
For many times he found his cash box completely bare.
For surely (in the case of) an revelling apprentice
Who makes a practice of dicing, debauchery, or womanizing,
His master shall pay for it in his shop,
Even though he has no share of the entertainment (for which he pays).
For theft and debauchery, they are interchangeable.
Even though he knows how to play on guitar or fiddle.
Revelling and honesty, in one of low degree,
Are always incompatible, as anyone can see.
This jolly apprentice with his master remained,
Until he was nearly out of his apprenticeship,
Although he was rebuked both early and late,
And sometimes taken (as a prisoner) with music to Newgate prison.
But at the last his master remembered,
Upon a day, when Perkin sought his certificate of release,
A proverb that says this same word:
"Well better is a rotten apple out of the store
Than that it rot al the remnant."
So fares it with a debauched servant;
It is much less harm to let him go away,
Than that he should ruin all the servants in the place.
Therefore his master gave him his certificate,
And ordered him to go, with sorrow and with bad luck!
And thus this jolly apprentice had his leave.
Now let him revel all the night or leave off (do as he chooses).
And because there is no thief without an accomplice,
Who helps him to waste and to consume
That which he can steal or may borrow,
Right away he sent his bed and his clothing
Unto a companion of his own sort,
Who loved dicing, and revelling, and having fun,
And had a wife that kept for the sake of appearances
A shop, and screwed for her living.
