But one word, lords, hear before I go:
It would be very difficult to find now-a-days
In all the town Griseldas three or two;
For if they were put to such tests,
The gold of them has now been so badly debased
With brass, that though the coin be fair to look at,
It would rather break in two than bend.
For which here, for the love of the Wife of Bath --
Whose life and all her sect may God maintain
In high mastery, and otherwise it would be a pity --
I will with lusty heart, fresh and vigorous,
Say you a song to make you happy, I believe;
And let us stint of serious matter.
Hear my song that says in this manner:
Griselda is dead, and also her patience,
And both together buried in Italy;
For which I cry in the hearing of all
No wedded man so bold be to test
His wife's patience trusting to find
Griselda, for certainly he shall faille.
O noble wives, full of great prudence,
Let no humility nail down your tongue,
Nor let any clerk have cause or eagerness
To write about you a story of such marvel
As of patient and kind Griselda,
Lest Chichevache swallow you in her entrails!
Follow Echo, who holds no silence,
But ever answers in reply.
Be not fooled because of your innocence,
But eagerly take the governance to yourself.
Imprint well this lesson in your mind,
Since it may work to the benefit of all.
You arch-wives, stand ready for battle,
Since you are strong as is a great camel;
Suffer not that men do offense to you.
And slender wives, feeble in battle,
Be fierce as is a tiger yonder in India;
Ever wag your tongues like a windmill, I you advise.
Fear them not; do them no reverence,
For though thy husband be armed in mail,
The arrows of thy spiteful eloquence
Shall pierce his breast and also his neck-guard.
In jealousy I advise also that thou bind him,
And thou shalt make him cower as does a quail.
If thou be fair, where folk are present,
Show thou thy visage and thy apparel;
If thou be ugly, be lavish in thy expenditures;
To get thee friends always work hard;
Be ever in behavior as light as a leaf on a linden tree,
And let him grieve, and weep, and wring his hands, and wail!
[When ended was the tale of this worthy Clerk,
Our Host said, and swore, "By God's bones,
I would rather than have a barrel of ale
My wife at home had heard this legend once!
This is a fine tale for this occasion,
For my purposes, if you knew my will;
But thing that will not be, let it be still."]
