There is, at the west side of Italy,
Down at the foot of Vesulus the cold,
A lusty plain, abundant with food crops,
Where many a tower and town thou may behold,
That were founded in time of fathers old,
And many another delectable sight,
And Saluces this noble country is called.
A marquis once was lord of that land,
As were his worthy elders before him;
And obedient, ever ready to his hand (to do his commands),
Were all his subjects, both lesser ranks and nobles.
Thus in delight he lives, and has done since long before,
Beloved and feared, through favor of Fortune,
Both by his lords and by his citizenry.
Moreover he was, to speak of lineage,
The most noble born in Lombardy,
A handsome person, and strong, and young of age,
And full of honor and of courtesy;
Discreet enough to govern his country,
Except in some things he was to blame;
And Walter was this young lord's name.
I blame him thus: that he considered not
In time coming what might happen to him,
But on his immediate pleasure was all his thought,
Such as to hawk and hunt on every side.
Well nigh all other cares he let slip away,
And also he would not -- and that was worst of all --
Wed any woman, for anything that may befall.
Only that point his people took so badly
That in groups on one day they went to him,
And one of them, that wisest was in learning --
Or else the one that the lord most readily would consent
That he should tell him what his people meant,
Or else he knew well how to present such a matter --
He to the marquis said as you shall hear:
"O noble marquis, your graciousness
Makes us confident and gives us boldness,
As often as it is time (to do so) by necessity,
That we to you may tell our sorrow.
Grant, lord, now of your nobility
That we with pitiful heart may unto you complain,
And let your ears not disdain (to hear) my voice.
"Although I have nothing to do in this matter
More than another man has in this place,
Yet for as much as you, my lord so dear,
Have always shown me favor and grace
I dare the more confidently to ask of you a time
Of hearing to present our request,
And you, my lord, to do right as it may please you.
"For certainly, lord, so well you please us 
And all your actions, and ever have done so, that we
Could not ourselves imagine how
We might live in more happiness,
Save one thing, lord, if it be your will,
That you would desire to be a wedded man;
Then your people would be in complete peace of mind.
"Bow your neck under that blissful yoke
Of sovereignty, not of servitude,
Which men call marriage or wedlock;
And think, lord, among your wise thoughts 
How our days pass in various ways,
For though we sleep, or wake, or roam, or ride,
Ever flees the time; it will wait for no man.
"And though your green youth flowers as yet,
In creeps age always, as still as stone,
And death menaces every age, and smites
In each rank, for there escapes no one;
And just as certainly as we know, each one of us,
That we shall die, as uncertain we all
Are of that day when death shall on us fall.
"Accept then the true intent of us,
Who never yet refused your command,
And we will, lord, if you will assent,
Chose a wife for you, in short time at the least,
Born of the most noble and of the greatest (in rank)
Of all this land, so that it must seem
Honor to God and you, so far as we can judge.
"Deliver us out of all this constant fear,
And take a wife, for high God's sake!
For if it so happen, may God forbid,
That through your death your line should die out,
And that a foreign successor should take
Your heritage, O woe would it be to us in our lifetime!
Wherefore we pray you hastily to take a wife."
Their meek prayer and their pitiful manner
Made the marquis's heart have pity.
"You want," said he, "my own people dear,
That which I never before thought to compel myself.
I rejoiced in my liberty,
That seldom is found in marriage;
Where I was free, I must be in servitude.
"But nevertheless I see your true intent,
And trust upon your intelligence, and always have done so;
Therefore of my free will I will assent
To wed, as soon as ever I can.
But insofar as you have offered me to-day
To choose me a wife, I release you 
(From making) that choice and pray you to cease (making) that offer.
"For God knows it, that children often are
Unlike their worthy elders (who came) before them;
All goodness comes from God, not from the lineage
By which they are conceived and born.
I trust in God's goodness, and therefore
My marriage and my estate and peace of mind 
I entrust to him; he may do as he pleases.
"Let me alone in the choosing of my wife --
That responsibility upon my back I will endure.
But I you pray, and order you upon your life,
Whatever wife I take, you me assure
To honor her, while her life may endure,
In word and deed, both here and everywhere,
As if she were an emperor's daughter.
"And furthermore, this shall you swear: that you
Against my choice shall neither grouch nor strive;
For since I must forgo my liberty
At your request, as ever I may thrive,
Where my heart is set, there will I take a wife;
And unless you will assent in such a manner,
I pray you, speak no more of this matter."
With heartfelt will they swore and assent
To all this thing -- there said no person nay --
Beseeching him of grace, before they went,
That he would grant them a fixed day
Of his wedding, as soon as ever he can;
For yet always the people somewhat dreaded,
Lest the marquis no wife would wed.
He granted them a day, such as he pleased,
On which he would be wedded surely,
And said he did all this at their request.
And they, with humble good will, obediently,
Kneeling upon their knees full reverently,
All thanked him; and thus they have a conclusion
In accord with their wishes, and home again they go.
And thereupon he to his officers
Commands the feast to prepare,
And to his household knights and squires
Gave such orders as he desired to lay on them;
And they to his commandment obey,
And each of them does all his efforts
To lend honor unto the feast.
Not far from that same noble palace,
Where this marquis planned his marriage,
There stood a small village, in a delightful location,
In which poor folk of that village
Had their beasts and their dwellings
And of their labor took their sustenance,
According to what produce the earth gave them.
Among these poor folk there dwelt a man
Who was considered poorest of them all;
But high God sometimes can send 
His grace into a little ox's stall;
Janicula men of that village call him.
A daughter had he, fair enough in appearance,
And Griselda this young maiden was called.
But to speak of virtuous beauty,
Then was she the fairest of all under sun;
Because she was raised in poverty,
No sensual desire had run through her heart.
Much more often of the well than of the wine barrel
She drank, and because she would satisfy the demands of virtue
She knew well labor but no idle ease.
But though this maid was tender of age,
Yet in the breast of her virginity
There was enclosed a mature and steadfast spirit;
And in great reverence and charity
Her old poor father she cared for.
A few sheep, while spinning, on field she kept;
She would not be idle until she slept.
And when she homeward came, she would bring
Cabbages or other greens very often,
Which she shredded and boiled for their sustenance
And made her bed full hard and not at all soft;
And ever she sustained her father's life
With every obedience and diligence
That child may do to father's reverence.
Upon Griselda, this poor creature,
Very many times this marquis set his eye
By chance, as he on hunting rode;
And when it happened that he might see her,
He not with lecherous looking of folly
His eyes cast on hire, but in serious manner
Upon her demeanor he would often think,
Commending in his heart her womanly qualities,
And also her virtue, passing any person
Of so young age, as well in manner as deed.
For though the people have no great insight
In virtue, he considered very carefully
Her goodness, and decided that he would
Wed her only, if ever he should wed.
The day of wedding came, but no person can
Tell what woman it should be;
For which marvel wondered many a man,
And said, when they were in private,
"Will not our lord yet leave his vanity?
Will he not wed? Alas! Alas, the times!
Why will he thus himself and us deceive?"
But nevertheless this marquis has made
Of gems, set in gold and in azure,
Brooches and rings, for Griselda's sake;
And of her clothing he took the measure
By a maid like her (in) stature,
And also of all other ornaments
That unto such a wedding should be appropriate.
The time of mid-morning of the same day
Approaches, when this wedding should be,
And all the palace was put in proper order,
Both hall and chambers, each in its turn;
Storage buildings stuffed with plenty,
There canst thou see, of delicious foods
What can be found from as far as farthest Italy.
This royal marquis, richly arrayed,
Lords and ladies in his company,
Who were invited to the feast, 
And of his retinue the knights,
With many a sound of varied melody,
Unto the village of which I told
In this splendid array the direct route have held.
Griselda of this, God knows, full ignorant,
That for her was all this splendour prepared,
Has gone to fetch water at a well,
And comes home as soon as ever she can;
For well she had heard said that same day
The marquis should wed, and if she could,
She would be happy to have seen some of that sight.
She thought, "I will stand with other maidens,
Who are my fellows, in our door and see
The marchioness, and therefore will I try
To do at home, as soon as it can be,
The chores that I must do,
And then I may at leisure her behold,
If she takes this way to the castle."
And as she would over her threshold go,
The marquis came and called her;
And she set down her water pot quickly,
Beside the threshold, in an ox's stall,
And down upon her knees she fell,
And with sober countenance kneels without speaking,
Until she had heard what was the lord's will.
This pensive marquis spoke unto this maid
Full soberly, and said in this manner:
"Where is your father, O Griselda?" he said.
And she with reverence, in humble manner,
Answered, "Lord, he is right here."
And in she goes without longer delay,
And to the marquis she fetched her father.
He by the hand then took this old man,
And said thus, when he had him aside:
"Janicula, I neither may nor can
Longer hide the desire of my heart.
If thou agree, whatsoever may happen,
Thy daughter will I take, before I depart,
For my wife, until her life's end.
"Thou lovest me, I know it well for certain,
And art my faithful liege man born,
And all that pleases me, I dare well say
It pleases thee, and specially therefore
Tell me of that question that I have stated previously,
If thou will agree with that proposal,
To take me for thy son-in-law."
This sudden occurrence this man so astounded 
That he grew red; abashed and all trembling
He stood; hardly said he any more words,
But only thus: "Lord," said he, "my desire
Is as you wish, and against your pleasure
I will do nothing, you are my lord so dear;
Right as you please, govern this matter."
"Yet I want," said this marquis softly,
"That in thy chamber I and thou and she
Have a discussion, and knowest thou why?
For I will ask if it be her will 
To be my wife and conduct herself as I decide.
And all this shall be done in thy presence;
I will say nothing out of thy hearing."
And in the chamber, while they were engaged in
Their negotiation, which you shall after hear,
The people came unto outside the house,
And wondered in what a virtuous manner
And how attentively she cared for her dear father.
But certainly Griselda might wonder,
For never before saw she such a sight.
Though it is no wonder that she was astonished
To see so great a guest come in that place;
She never was accustomed to such guests,
For which she looked full pale in her face.
But shortly forth this matter to pursue,
These are the words that the marquis said
To this benign, true, faithful maid:
"Griselda," he said, "you shall well understand
It is pleasing to your father and to me
That I you wed, and also it may so stand,
As I suppose, that you desire that it so be.
But these questions ask I first," said he,
"That, since it shall be done in a hasty manner,
Will you assent, or else think it over?
"I say this: are you ready (to submit) with good heart
To all my desires, and that I freely may,
As seems best to me, make you laugh or feel pain,
And you never to grouch about it, at any time?
And also when I say `yes,' say not `nay,'
Neither by word nor frowning countenance?
Swear this, and here I swear our alliance."
Wondering upon these words, trembling for fear,
She said, "Lord, unsuitable and unworthy
Am I of that same honor that you offer me,
But as you desire yourself, right so desire I.
And here I swear that never willingly,
In deed nor thought, will I disobey you,
Even to be dead, though I would hate to die."
"This is enough, Griselda mine," said he.
And forth he goes with a full sober manner
Out of the door, and after that came she,
And to the people he said in this manner:
"This is my wife," said he, "that stands here.
Honor her and love her, I pray,
Whoever loves me; there is no more to say."
And so that nothing of her old belongings
She should bring into his house, he ordered
That women should undress her right there;
Of which these ladies were not very happy
To handle her clothes, in which she was clad.
But nevertheless, this maid bright of hue
From foot to head they have clothed all new.
Her hair have they combed, that lay unkempt
Very crudely, and with their elegant fingers
A crown on her head they have placed,
And set her garments full of jeweled ornaments of every sort.
Of her appearance why should I make a long tale?
The hardly people knew her for her beauty
When she was translated into such riches.
This marquis has espoused her with a ring
Brought for the same purpose, and then set her 
Upon a horse, snow-white and with a gentle pace,
And to his palace, before he longer delayed,
With joyful people that led and met her,
Conducted her; and thus the day they spend
In revel, until the sun descended.
And shortly forth this tale to pursue,
I say that to this new marchioness 
God has such favor sent her of his grace
That it seemed not likely
That she was born and fed in humble circumstances,
In a peasant's hut or in an ox-stall,
But nurtured in an emperor's hall.
To every person she is grown so dear
And worshipful that folk where she was born,
And from her birth knew her year by year,
They hardly believed -- but dared have sworn --
That to Janicle, of whom I spoke before,
She was daughter, for, by conjecture,
They thought she was another creature.
For though that she was always virtuous,
She was increased in such excellence
Of good characteristics, set in high goodness,
And so discreet and fair of eloquence,
So benign and so worthy of reverence,
And could so the people's heart embrace,
That each who looked on her face loved her.
Not only in the town of Saluces 
Was made known the praise of her name,
But also moreover in many a region,
If one said well, another said the same;
So spread the fame of her high goodness 
That men and women, as well young as old,
Go to Saluce to look upon her.
Thus Walter lowly -- nay, but royally --
Wedded with beneficial virtue,
In God's peace lives full easily
At home, and to all appearances he had sufficient happiness;
And because he saw that under low social rank
Was often virtue hid, the people considered him
A prudent man, and that is seen full seldom.
Not only this Griselda through her wit
Knew all the skills of a housewife's duties,
But also, when the situation required it,
The public good could she promote.
There was no discord, rancor, nor sadness 
In all that land that she could not alleviate,
And wisely bring them all in rest and ease.
Though her husband was absent at the time,
If noble men or others of her country
Were wroth, she would bring them to agreement;
Such wise and well considered words had she,
And judgments of such great justice,
That she was sent from heaven, as men supposed,
People to save and every wrong to amend.
Not long time after this Griselda
Was married, she has borne a daughter,
Although she would rather have given birth to a male child;
Glad was this marquis and the folk for this,
For though a maid child came all before,
She may unto a male child attain
By likelihood, since she is not barren.
There happened, as it befalls many times,
When this child had suckled but a short time,
This marquis in his heart longs so
To test his wife, her constancy to know,
That he could not out of his heart throw
This strange desire to test his wife;
Needless, God knows, he intended to frighten her.
He had tested her enough before,
And found her always good; why was it needed
To test her, and always more and more,
Though some men praise its ingenuity?
But as for me, I say that it ill befits one
To test a wife when there is no need,
And put her in anguish and in dread.
For which this marquis worked in this manner:
He came alone at night, where she lay,
With stern face and with a very troubled manner,
And said thus: "Griselda," said he, "that day
That I took you out of your impoverished situation,
And put you in the condition of high nobility --
You have not forgotten that, as I suppose?
"I say, Griselda, this present high social position,
In which I have put you, as I believe,
Requires that you be not forgetful 
That I took you in a poor, very humble condition,
Despite any present prosperity you must know it yourself. 
Take heed of every word that I say to you;
There is no person that hears it but we two.
"You know well yourself how you came here
Into this house, it is not long ago;
And though to me you are beloved and dear,
Unto my nobles you are not at all so.
They say, to them it is great shame and woe
To be subjects and be in servitude
To thee, that art born in a humble village.
"And especially since thy daughter was born
These words have they spoken, doubtless.
But I desire, as I have done before,
To live my life with them in rest and peace.
I can not be imprudent in this case;
I must do with thy daughter for the best,
Not as I would want, but as my people desire.
"And yet, God knows, this is full hateful to me;
But nevertheless without your knowledge
I will not do anything; but this I desire," said he,
"That you assent to me in this matter.
Show now in your actions your patience, 
That you promised me and swore in your village
That day that our marriage was made."
When she had heard all this, she changed not 
Neither in word, nor manner, nor countenance,
For, as it seemed, she was not aggrieved.
She said, "Lord, all is subject to your pleasure.
My child and I, with heart-felt obedience,
Are entirely yours, and you may save or kill
Your own thing; do as you will.
"There can nothing, as God my soul may save,
Please you that may displease me;
Nor do I desire to have anything,
Nor dread to lose, save only you.
This will is in my heart, and ever shall be;
No length of time or death can obliterate this,
Nor change my heart to another place."
Glad was this marquis of her answer,
But yet he feigned as if he were not so;
All sorrowful was his manner and his look,
When he had to go out of the chamber.
Soon after this, in a few minutes,
He privately has told all his plan
Unto a man, and sent him to his wife.
A sort of sergeant (policeman) was this confidential servant,
Whom he had often found faithful 
In important matters, and also such folk well can
Carry out their orders in evil matters.
The lord knew well that he loved and dreaded him;
And when this sergeant knew his lord's will,
Into the chamber he stalked very quietly.
"Madame," he said, "you must forgive it me,
Though I do a thing to which I am constrained.
You are so wise that full well you know
That lords' commands may not be evaded (by feigning);
They may well be bewailed or complained of,
But men must by necessity unto their desires obey,
And so will I; there is no more to say.
"This child I am commanded to take" --
And spoke no more, but out the child he seized
Mercilessly, and made a face
As if he would have slain it before he went.
Griselda must suffer all and consent to all,
And as a lamb she sits meek and still,
And let this cruel sergeant do his will.
Suspicious was the bad reputation of this man,
Suspect his face, suspect his word also;
Suspect the time in which he this began.
Alas! Her daughter that she loved so,
She thought he would have slain it right then.
But nevertheless she neither wept nor sighed,
Conforming herself to what the marquis pleased.
But at the last she began to speak,
And meekly she to the sergeant prayed,
As he was a worthy gentle man,
That she might kiss her child before it died.
And in her lap this little child she laid
With full sad face, and blessed the child,
And lulled it, and afterward kissed it.
And thus she said in her benign voice,
"Farewell my child! I shall thee never see.
But since I have marked thee with the cross
Of that same Father -- blessed may he be! --
That for us died upon a cross of wood,
Thy soul, little child, I entrust to him,
For this night shalt thou die for my sake."
I believe that to a nurse in this case
It would have been hard this pitiful situation to see;
Well might a mother then have cried "alas!"
But nevertheless so firmly steadfast was she
That she endured all adversity,
And to the sergeant meekly she said,
"Have here again your little young maid.
"Go now," said she, "and do my lord's command;
But one thing will I pray you of your grace,
That, unless my lord forbad you, at the least
Bury this little body in some place
That no beasts nor birds tear it to pieces."
But he no word will say to that proposal,
But took the child and went upon his way.
This sergeant came unto his lord again,
And of Griselda's words and her manner
He told him in detail, in short and plain (words),
And presents him with his daughter dear.
Somewhat this lord had pity in his manner,
But nevertheless his purpose held he still,
As lords do, when they will have their will;
And commanded this sergeant that he secretly
Should this child softly wind and wrap (in a blanket),
With every care tenderly,
And carry it in a box or in a folded cloth;
But, upon pain of having his head cut off,
No man should know of his intention,
Nor whence he came, nor whither he went;
But at Bologna to his sister dear,
Who at that very time was countess of Panik,
He should take it and explain to her this matter,
Beseeching her to do her best
This child to nurture in all noble manners;
And whose child that it was he commanded her to hide
From every person, for anything that may happen.
The sergeant goes, and has fulfilled this order;
But to this marquis we now return.
For now he goes very intently considering
If by his wife's appearance he might see,
Or by her word perceive, if she
Were changed; but he never could find her 
Anything but always the same, alike steadfast and kind.
As glad, as humble, as diligent in service,
And also in love, as she was accustomed to be,
Was she to him in every sort of way;
Nor of her daughter not a word spoke she.
No external sign, for any adversity,
Was seen in her, and never her daughter's name
Mentioned she, in earnest nor in jest (in any way).
In this condition there are passed four years
Before she was with child, but, as God would,
A male child she bore by this Walter,
Very gracious and beautiful in appearance.
And when folk told it to his father,
Not only he but all his country merry
Was for this child, and God they thank and praise.
When it was two years old, and from the breast
Of his nurse weaned, on one day
This marquis caught yet another desire
To test his wife yet again, if he can.
O needless was she put to the test!
But wedded men know no moderation,
When they find a patient creature.
"Wife," said this marquis, "you have heard before this
My people are unhappy with our marriage;
And especially since my son is born,
Now is it worse than ever in all our lives.
The grumbling slays my heart and my feelings,
For to my ears comes the voice so sharply
That it well nigh has destroyed my heart.
"Now say they thus: `When Walter is gone,
Then shall the blood of Janicle succeed
And be our lord, for we have no other.'
Such words say my people, no doubt.
Well ought I of such grumbling take heed,
For certainly I dread such opinion,
Though they speak not plainly in my hearing.
"I would live in peace, if I could; 
Therefore I am firmly resolved, 
As I dealt with his sister by night,
Right so I intend to deal with him secretly.
This I warn you, so that you not suddenly
For any woe should break out in a passion;
Be patient, and for that I pray you."
"I have," said she, "said thus, and ever shall:
I want nothing, nor will not want any thing, certainly,
But as you desire. It does not grieve me at all,
Though my daughter and my son be slain --
At your commandment, this is to say.
I have not had any part of children two
But first sickness, and after, woe and pain.
"You are our lord; do with your own thing
Right as you desire; ask no advice from me.
For as I left at home all my clothing,
When I first came to you, right so," said she,
"Left I my will and all my liberty,
And took your clothing; wherefore I you pray,
Do your pleasure; I will obey your desire.
"And certainly, if I had foreknowledge
To know your will, before you told me your desire,
I would do it without negligence;
But now I know your desire, and what you want,
All your pleasure (whatever you wish) firm and stable I hold;
For if I knew that my death would do you ease,
Right gladly would I die, to please you.
"Death can not make any comparison (is nothing compared)
Unto your love." And when this marquis saw
The constancy of his wife, he cast down
His eyes two, and wonders that she can
In patience suffer all this treatment;
And forth he goes with sorrowful countenance,
But to his heart it was full great pleasure.
This ugly sergeant, in the same manner
That he her daughter seized, right so he --
Or worse, if one can worse imagine --
Has seized her son, that was full of beauty.
And continually so patient was she
That she made no appearance of sadness,
But kissed her son, and afterwards it blessed;
Save this, she prayed him that, if he could,
Her little son he would bury in earth
His tender limbs, pleasing in appearance,
From birds and from beasts to save.
But she no answer of him might have.
He went his way, as if he cared nothing about it,
But to Bologna he tenderly brought it.
This marquis wondered, more and more,
Upon her patience, and if he
Had not truly known before this
That she perfectly loved her children,
He would have supposed that by some trickery,
And out of malice, or for hard heart,
That she had suffered this with calm manner.
But well he knew that next to himself, certainly,
She loved her children best in every way.
But now I would like to ask of women 
If these tests might not suffice?
What could a cruel husband more devise
To test her wifehood and her steadfastness,
And he continuing ever in cruelty?
But there are folk of such disposition
That when they have a certain purpose taken,
They can not refrain from their intention,
But, right as if they were bound to that stake,
They will not from that original plan desist.
Right so this marquis has firmly decided
To test his wife as he was first disposed.
He watches to see if by word or countenance
That she to him was changed in heart,
But never could he find variation.
She was always the same in heart and in visage,
And ever the further that she was in age,
The more true, if it were possible,
She was to him in love, and more attentive.
For which it seemed thus: that of them two
There was but one will, for as Walter desired,
The same desire was her pleasure also.
And, God be thanked, all fell for the best.
She proved good; for no worldly discomfort
A wife, concerning herself, nothing should
Desire in fact, except what her husband would want.
The ill fame of Walter spread often and wide,
That of a cruel heart he wickedly,
Because he had wedded a poor woman,
Has murdered both his children secretly.
Such grumbling was among them unanimously.
No wonder is, for to the people's ear
There came no word but that they were murdered.
For which, whereas his people before this
Had loved him well, the disgrace of his bad reputation
Made them so that they hated him for this.
To be a murderer is (to have) a hateful reputation;
But nevertheless, not for any reason,
Would he of his cruel purpose desist;
To test his wife was set all his intention.
When his daughter was twelve years of age,
He to the court of Rome, (which was) in a cunning manner
Informed of his real purpose, sent his messenger,
Commanding them such papal bulls to devise
As to his cruel purpose may suffice --
How the pope, to restore tranquility for his people,
Commanded him to wed another, if he pleased.
I say, he commanded they should counterfeit
The pope's bulls, making mention
That he has permission to leave his first wife,
As by the pope's dispensation,
To stint rancor and dissension
Between his people and him; thus said the bull,
Which they have published widely.
The ignorant people, as it no wonder is,
Supposed full well that it had been right so;
But when these tidings came to Griselda,
I believe that her heart was very woeful.
But she, continuously steadfast for evermore,
Disposed was, this humble creature,
To endure all the adversity of Fortune,
Enduring ever his desire and his pleasure,
To whom she was given, heart and all,
As her true worldly source of satisfaction.
But shortly if this story I tell shall,
This marquis written has in detail
A letter, in which he reveals his intention,
And secretly he sent it to Bologna.
To the Earl of Panyk, who had then
Wedded his sister, prayed he specifically
To bring home again his two children
In a noble public display.
But one thing he him prayed earnestly,
That he to no one, though men would inquire,
Should tell whose children they were,
But say the maiden should wedded be
Unto the Marquis of Saluce immediately.
And as this earl was asked, so did he;
For at the set day he on his way is gone
Toward Saluce, and lords many a one
In rich array, this maiden to guide,
Her young brother riding beside her.
Adorned was in preparation for her marriage
This lovely maid, (her clothing) full of bright gems;
Her brother, who was seven years of age,
Adorned also full handsomely in his manner.
And thus in great nobility and with a glad manner,
Toward Saluces directing their journey,
From day to day they ride on their way.
Meanwhile, in accord with his wicked usage,
This marquis, yet his wife to test more
To the utmost test of her heart,
Fully to have experience and knowledge
If she were as steadfast as before,
He on a certain day in the hearing of all
Full rudely has said to her this speech:
"Certainly, Griselda, I had enough pleasure
To have you as my wife for your goodness,
As for your truth and for your obedience
Not for your lineage, nor for your riches;
But now know I in true certainty
That in great lordship, if I judge rightly,
There is great servitude in various ways.
"I can not do as every plowman may.
My people constrain me to take
Another wife, and complain day by day;
And also the pope, to quench rancor, 
Consents to it -- that dare I assert --
And truly thus much I will say to you:
My new wife is coming by the way.
"Be strong of heart, and vacate her place immediately;
And that dowry that you brought me,
Take it back; I grant it of my grace.
Return to your father's house," said he;
"No one can always have prosperity.
With tranquil heart I advise you to endure
The stroke of Fortune or of chance."
And she in reply answered in patience:
"My lord," said she, "I know, and knew always,
How between your magnificence
And my poverty no person can nor may
Make comparison; it cannot be denied.
I considered myself never worthy in any way
To be your wife, no, nor your chambermaid.
"And in this house, where you made me the lady --
The high God I take for my witness,
And as surely as he my soul may gladden --
I never considered myself lady nor mistress,
But humble servant to your worthiness,
And ever shall, while my life may endure,
Above every worldly creature.
"That you so long of your benignity
Have maintained me in honor and nobility,
Where I was not worthy to be,
For that I thank you and God, to Whom I pray
To reward you for it; there is no more to say.
Unto my father gladly will I go,
And with him dwell unto my life's end.
"Where I was fostered as a child full small,
Until I be dead I will lead my life there,
A widow clean in body, heart, and all.
For since I gave to you my maidenhead,
And am your true wife, there is no doubt,
God forbid such a lord's wife to take
Another man as husband or as mate!
"And of your new wife God of his grace
Grant you happiness and prosperity!
For I will gladly yield her my place,
In which I was accustomed to be blissful.
For since it pleases you, my lord," said she,
"Who once was all my heart's peace,
That I shall go, I will go when you please.
"But inasmuch as you offer me such dowry
As I first brought, it is well in my mind
It was my wretched clothing, in no way fair,
Which to me were hard to find now.
O good God! How gentle and how kind
You seemed by your speech and your visage
The day that our marriage was made!
"But sooth is said -- always I find it true,
For in fact it is proven by me --
When love is old it is not the same as when it was new.
But certainly, lord, for no adversity,
Even if I were to die miserably, it shall not be
That ever in word or deed I shall repent
That I gave you my heart whole heartedly.
"My lord, you know that in my father's place
You had me stripped out of my poor clothing,
And had me richly clad, by your grace.
To you I brought nothing else, beyond doubt,
But faith, and nakedness, and maidenhead;
And here in return your clothing I restore,
And also your wedding ring, for evermore.
"The remnant of your jewels ready are
Within your chamber, dare I confidently say.
Naked out of my father's house," said she,
"I came, and naked must I return.
All your pleasure will I eagerly follow;
But yet I hope it be not your intention
That I should go without a smock out of your palace.
"You could not do so shameful a thing,
That that same womb in which your children lay
Should before the people, in my walking,
Be seen all bare; therefore I you pray,
Let me not like a worm go by the way.
Remember, my own lord so dear,
I was your wife, though I unworthy were.
"Therefore, in recompense for my maidenhead,
Which I brought, and nothing I bear back,
Condescend to give me, as my recompense,
Only such a smock as I was accustomed to wear,
That I with it may cover the womb of her
Who was your wife. And here take I my leave
Of you, my own lord, lest I you grieve."
"The smock," said he, "that thou hast on thy back,
Let it be (there) still, and bear it forth with thee."
But scarcely that same word he spoke,
But went his way, for grief and for pity.
Before the folk she strips herself,
And in her smock, with head and foot all bare,
Toward her father's house forth is she gone.
The folk follow her, weeping on their way,
And Fortune ever they curse as they go;
But she from weeping kept her eyes dry,
And in this time no word she spoke.
Her father, who heard this news straightway,
Curses the day and time that Nature
Shaped him to be a living creature.
For doubtless this old poor man
Was ever in suspicion of her marriage;
For ever he believed, since it began,
That when the lord had fulfilled his desires,
He would think it was a degradation
To his rank so low to stoop,
And get rid of her as soon as ever he could.
To meet his daughter hastily goes he,
For he by noise of folk knew her coming,
And with her old coat, insofar as it could
He covered her, full sorrowfully weeping.
But on her body he could not bring it,
For coarse was the cloth, and more of age
By many days than at her marriage.
Thus with her father for a certain space of time
Dwells this flower of womanly patience,
That neither by her words nor her face,
Before the folk, nor also in their absence,
She showed that to her was done offence;
Nor of her high estate no remembrance
Had she, according to her countenance.
No wonder is, for in her great estate
Her spirit was ever in full humility;
No tender mouth, no self-indulgent feelings,
No pomp, nor outward appearance of royalty,
But full of patient goodness,
Discreet and without pride, ever honorable,
And to her husband ever meek and stable.
Men speak of Job, and mostly for his humility,
As clerks, when they want, know well how to write,
Especially of men, but in truth,
Though clerks praise women but a little,
There can no man in humility acquit himself
As woman can, nor can be half so true
As women are, unless it happened recently.
From Bologna is this Earl of Panyk come,
Of which the news up sprang to high ranks and low,
And to the people's ears, one and all,
Was made known also that a new marchioness 
He brought with him, in such pomp and riches
That never was there seen with man's eye
Such a noble array in all West Lombardy.
The marquis, who arranged and knew all this,
Before this earl was come, sent his messenger
For that same innocent poor Griselda;
And she with humble heart and glad visage,
Not with any proud thought in her heart,
Came at his command, and on her knees set herself,
And reverently and wisely she greeted him.
"Griselda," said he, "my will is completely
That this maiden, who shall be wedded to me,
Be received to-morrow as royally
As it is possible in my house to be,
And also that every person, according to his rank
Have his due respect, in seating and service
And great pleasure, as I can best arrange.
"I have no women capable, certainly,
The chambers to put in order
According to my wishes, and therefore I would like
That thine be the supervision of all this business.
Thou knowest also of old all my desires;
Though thy dress be bad and in poor condition,
Do thou thy duty at least."
"Not only, lord, I am glad," said she,
"To do your wishes, but I desire also
You to serve and please in accord with my rank
Without weakening, and shall evermore;
Nor never, for any happiness nor any woe,
Shall the spirit within my heart cease
To love you best with all my true will."
And with that word she began to prepare the house,
And to set tables, and make beds;
And took pains to do all that she could,
Praying the chambermaids, for God's sake,
To hasten themselves, and fast sweep and dust;
And she, the most willing to serve of all,
Has every chamber prepared and his hall.
About mid-morning did this earl alight,
Who with him brought these noble children two,
For which the people ran to see the sight
Of their accoutrements, so rich in appearance;
And then for the first time amongst themselves they say
That Walter was no fool, though he desired
To change his wife, for it was for the best.
For she is fairer, as they all decide,
Than is Griselda, and more tender of age,
And fairer fruit between them should fall,
And more pleasing, because of her high lineage.
Her brother also so fair was of visage
That the people take pleasure in seeing them,
Commending now the marquis's governance.
"O stormy people! Inconstant and ever untrue!
Ever undiscerning and changing like a weather vane!
Delighting ever in rumor that is new,
For like the moon ever you wax and wane!
Always full of chattering, not worth a penny!
Your judgment is false, your constancy proves evil;
A full great fool is he that believes in you."
Thus said serious folk in that city,
When the people gazed up and down,
For they were glad, right for the novelty,
To have a new lady of their town.
No more of this make I now mention,
But to Griselda again will I address myself,
And tell her constancy and her diligence.
Full busy was Griselda in every thing
That was pertaining to the feast.
Not at all was she ashamed of her clothing,
Though it was crude and also somewhat ragged;
But with glad manner to the gate is went
With other folk to greet the marchioness,
And after that carries on her work.
With such glad manner his guests she receives,
And so skillfully, each according to his rank,
That no man perceives any fault,
But ever they wonder who she might be
That in such poor array was to be seen,
And knew how to do such honor and reverence,
And deservedly they praise her prudence.
In all this mean while she did not cease
This maid and also her brother to commend
With all her heart, in full benign intention,
So well that no man could praise her more highly.
But at the last, when these lords went
To sit down to dinner, he called
Griselda, as she was busy in his hall.
"Griselda," said he, as if it were a joke,
"How do you like my wife and her beauty?"
"Right well," said she, "my lord; for, in good faith,
I never saw so fair a one as she.
I pray to God to give her prosperity;
And so I hope that he will to you send
Pleasure enough unto your lives' end.
"One thing I beseech you, and warn also,
That you not distress with any tormenting
This tender maiden, as you have done to others;
For she has been reared in her nurture
More tenderly, and, as I believe,
She could not endure adversity 
As could a poorly reared creature."
And when this Walter saw her patience,
Her glad expression, and no malice at all,
And he so often had done to her offence,
And she ever steadfast and constant as a wall,
Continuing ever her innocence in every way,
This stern marquis inclined his heart
To have pity upon her womanly steadfastness.
"This is enough, Griselda mine," said he;
"Be now no more frightened nor displeased.
I have thy faith and thy goodness,
As well as ever woman was, tested,
In great estate and in poverty.
Now I know, dear wife, thy steadfastness" --
And took her in arms and kissed her.
And she for amazement took of it no notice;
She heard not what thing he said to her;
She fared as if she had suddenly awakened out of a sleep,
Until out of her bewilderment she suddenly awoke.
"Griselda," said he, "by God, who for us died,
Thou art my wife, and none other I have,
Nor ever had, as God my soul may save!
"This is thy daughter, which thou hast supposed
To be my wife; that other truly
Shall be my heir, as I have ever intended;
Thou bore him in thy body truly.
At Bologna I have kept them secretly;
Take them back, for now mayst thou not say
That thou hast lost any of thy children two.
"And folk that otherwise have said of me,
I declare to them clearly that I have done this deed
For no malice, nor for no cruelty,
But to test in thee thy womanhood,
And not to slay my children -- God forbid! --
But to keep them secretly and quietly,
Until I knew thy perseverence and all thy will."
When she heard this, down she falls in a swoon
For pitiful joy, and after her swooning
She calls both her young children to her,
And in her arms, pitifully weeping,
Embraces them, and tenderly kissing
Full like a mother, with her salt tears
She bathed both their visage and their hair.
O what a pathetic thing it was to see
Her swooning, and her humble voice to hear!
"Great thanks, lord, may God repay it to you," said she,
"That you have saved for me my children dear!
Now care I never to be dead right here;
Since I stand in your love and in your grace,
Death does not matter, nor when my spirit may pass (away)!
"O tender, o dear, o my young children!
Your woeful mother truly believed 
That cruel hounds or some foul animal pests
Had eaten you; but God of his mercy
And your benign father tenderly
Has had you protected" -- and in that same moment
All suddenly she fell down to the ground.
And in her swoon so tightly holds she
Her children two, when she embraced them,
That with great effort and great difficulty
The children from her arm they did tear away.
O many a tear on many a pitiful face
Down ran of them that stood beside her;
Hardly about her might they remain.
Walter comforts her and her sorrow relieves;
She rises up, disconcerted, from her trance,<b></b>
And every person makes joy and festivity for her
Until she has regained her composure.
Walter strives so faithfully to please her
That it was delightful to see the happiness
Between them two, now they are met together.
These ladies, when they see their time,
Have taken her and into chamber they go,
And strip her out of her crude clothing,
And in a cloth of gold that brightly shone,
With a crown of many a rich stone
Upon her head, they into hall her brought,
And there she was honored as she deserved.
Thus has this pitiful day a blissful end,
For every man and woman does his might
This day in mirth and revel to spend
Until in the sky shone the stars' light.
For more splendid in every man's sight
This feast was, and greater of cost,
Than was the revel of their marriage.
Full many a year in high prosperity
Live these two in peace and in quiet,
And richly his daughter married he
Unto a lord, one of the worthiest
Of all Italy; and then in peace and rest
His wife's father in his court he keeps,
Until the soul out of his body creeps.
His son succeeds in his heritage
In rest and peace, after his father's day,
And fortunate was also in marriage,
Although he put not his wife in great tests.
This world is not so strong, there is no denying,
As it has been in old times long ago,
And listen to what this author says concerning this (tale).
This story is said not so that wives should
Follow Griselda in humility,
For it would be intolerable, though they would (want to),
But so that every person, in his station in life,
Should be constant in adversity
As was Griselda; therefore Petrarch writes
This story, which with high style he composes.
For since a woman was so patient
Unto a mortal man, well more we ought to
Receive with a good will all that God sends us;
For it is very reasonable that he test what he made.
But he tests no man that he redeemed,
As says Saint James, if you his epistle read;
He tests folk all the time, it is no doubt,
And permits us, for our own good
With sharp whips of adversity
Full often to be beaten in various ways;
Not to know our will, for certainly he,
Before we were born, knew all our frailty;
And for our best is all his governance.
Let us then live in virtuous forbearance.
But one word, lords, hear before I go:
It would be very difficult to find now-a-days
In all the town Griseldas three or two;
For if they were put to such tests,
The gold of them has now been so badly debased
With brass, that though the coin be fair to look at,
It would rather break in two than bend.
For which here, for the love of the Wife of Bath --
Whose life and all her sect may God maintain
In high mastery, and otherwise it would be a pity --
I will with lusty heart, fresh and vigorous,
Say you a song to make you happy, I believe;
And let us stint of serious matter.
Hear my song that says in this manner:
Griselda is dead, and also her patience,
And both together buried in Italy;
For which I cry in the hearing of all
No wedded man so bold be to test
His wife's patience trusting to find
Griselda, for certainly he shall faille.
O noble wives, full of great prudence,
Let no humility nail down your tongue,
Nor let any clerk have cause or eagerness
To write about you a story of such marvel
As of patient and kind Griselda,
Lest Chichevache swallow you in her entrails!
Follow Echo, who holds no silence,
But ever answers in reply.
Be not fooled because of your innocence,
But eagerly take the governance to yourself.
Imprint well this lesson in your mind,
Since it may work to the benefit of all.
You arch-wives, stand ready for battle,
Since you are strong as is a great camel;
Suffer not that men do offense to you.
And slender wives, feeble in battle,
Be fierce as is a tiger yonder in India;
Ever wag your tongues like a windmill, I you advise.
Fear them not; do them no reverence,
For though thy husband be armed in mail,
The arrows of thy spiteful eloquence
Shall pierce his breast and also his neck-guard.
In jealousy I advise also that thou bind him,
And thou shalt make him cower as does a quail.
If thou be fair, where folk are present,
Show thou thy visage and thy apparel;
If thou be ugly, be lavish in thy expenditures;
To get thee friends always work hard;
Be ever in behavior as light as a leaf on a linden tree,
And let him grieve, and weep, and wring his hands, and wail!
[When ended was the tale of this worthy Clerk,
Our Host said, and swore, "By God's bones,
I would rather than have a barrel of ale
My wife at home had heard this legend once!
This is a fine tale for this occasion,
For my purposes, if you knew my will;
But thing that will not be, let it be still."]
ALIGN=top></A></LEFT> Texts on this page prepared and maintained by L. D. Benson <A HREF="mailto:ldb@wjh.harvard.edu">(ldb@wjh.harvard.edu)</A> 
