When the life of Saint Cecile was ended,
Before we had ridden a good five miles,
At Boghtoun under Blee overtook us 
A man who was clothed in black clothes,
And underneath that he had a white surplice.
His riding horse, that was all dapple gray,
So sweated that it was a wonder to see;
It seemed as if he had spurred hard for three miles.
The horse also that his yeoman rode upon
So sweated that it could hardly move.
About the collar stood the foam very high;
He was by foam all flecked like a magpie.
A double bag on his crupper lay;
It seemed that he carried little gear.
All lightly clad for summer rode this worthy man,
And in my heart I began to wonder
What he was until I understood
How his cloak was sewn to his hood,
For which, when I had long thought about it,
I judged him to be some sort of canon.
His hat hung at his back down by a strap,
For he had ridden at more than a trot or a walk;
He had always spurred as if he were crazy.
A burdock-leaf he had under his hood
For sweat and to keep his head from heat.
But what a joy it was to see him sweat!
His forehead dripped like a still
Full of the herbs plantain and pellitory.
And when he was come to us, he began to cry out,
"God save," said he, "this jolly company!
Fast have I spurred," said he, "for your sake,
Because I wanted to overtake you,
To ride in this merry company."
His yeoman also was full of courtesy,
And said, "Sirs, just now in the morning time
I saw you ride out of your hostelry,
And told my lord here and my sovereign,
Who is very eager to ride with you 
For his pleasure; he loves sociability."
"Friend, for thy telling him God give thee good luck,"
Then said our Host, "for certainly it would seem
Thy lord is wise, and as I can well judge.
He is very cheerful also, I dare wager!
Can he in any way tell a merry tale or two,
With which he may gladden this company?"
"Who, sir? My lord? Yes, yes, without lie,
He knows about mirth and also about jollity
More than enough; also, sir, trust me,
If you knew him as well as do I,
You would wonder how well and craftily
He knows how to work, and that in a variety of ways.
He has taken on him many a great enterprise,
Which would be very hard for any one who is here
To bring about, unless they learn it from him.
Despite how modestly he rides amongst you,
If you knew him, it would be to your advantage.
You would not forgo his acquaintance
For great riches, I dare wager on that
All that I have in my possession.
He is a man of great discretion;
I tell you indeed, he is a remarkable man."
"Well," said our Host, "I pray thee, tell me then,
Is he a clerk, or not? Tell what he is."
"Nay, he is greater than a clerk, indeed,"
Said this Yeoman, "and in few words,
Host, I will show you something of his craft.
"I say, my lord knows such esoteric science --
But all his craft you can not know from me,
And yet somewhat I help in his work --
That all this ground on which we are riding,
Until we come to Canterbury town,
He could turn all completely upside down,
And pave it all with silver and with gold."
And when this Yeoman had this tale told
Unto our Host, he said, "Bless you!
This thing is wonderfully marvelous to me,
Since thy lord is of such great prudence,
Because of which men should reverence him,
That he cares so little for his own self-respect.
His outer garment is not worth a fraction of a penny,
Because in fact, to him, as I may go (I swear), 
It is all dirty and tattered also.
Why is thy lord so slovenly, I pray thee,
And has the power to buy better cloth,
If his deeds accord with thy speech?
Tell me that, and of that I beseech thee."
"Why?" said this Yeoman, "why do you ask me?
So help me God, for he shall never prosper!
(But I will not publicly acknowledge what I say,
And therefore keep it secret, I pray you.)
He is too wise, in faith, as I believe.
That which is done too much, it will not turn out
Right, as clerks say; it is a vice.
Therefore in that I hold him ignorant and foolish.
For when a man has too great a wit,
Very often he happens to misuse it.
So does my lord, and that sorely grieves me;
God amend it! I can tell you no more."
"That does not matter, good Yeoman," said our Host;
"Since thou knowest of the cunning of thy lord,
Tell how he does, I pray thee heartily,
Since he is so crafty and so sly.
Where do you dwell, if it can be told?"
"In the outskirts of a town," said he,
"Lurking in hiding places and in dead-end alleys,
Where these robbers and these thieves by nature
Hold their private fearful residence,
Like those who dare not show their presence;
So fare we, if I shall say the truth."
"Now," said our Host, "yet let me talk to thee.
Why art thou so discolored in thy face?"
"Peter!" said he, "God give it bad luck,
I am so used to blow in the fire 
That it has changed my color, I believe.
I am not accustomed to peer in any mirror,
But to work hard and to learn to transmute metals.
We blunder ever and stare in the fire,
And despite all that, we fail to achieve our desire,
For ever we lack our desired conclusion.
To many folk we do delusion,
And borrow gold, be it a pound or two,
Or ten, or twelve, or many greater sums,
And make them believe, at the very least,
That of one pound we could make two.
Yet is it false, but always we have good hope
To do it, and after it we grope.
But that knowledge is so far ahead of us,
We can not, although we had sworn it,
Overtake it, it slides away so fast.
It will make us beggars at the last."
While this Yeoman was thus in his talking,
This Canon drew himself nearer and heard every thing
Which this Yeoman spoke, for suspicion
Of men's speech ever had this Canon.
For Cato says that he who is guilty
Believes every thing is spoken about him, indeed.
That was the cause he did draw himself so near 
To his Yeoman, to hear all his speech.
And thus he said unto his Yeoman then:
"Hold thou thy peace and speak no more words,
For if thou do, thou shalt dearly pay for it.
Thou slanderest me here in this company,
And also revealest what thou shouldest hide."
"Yes," said our Host, "tell on, whataever may happen.
Reckon all his threatening not worth a fraction of a penny!" 
"In faith," said he, "I do (reckon him) but little any more."
And when this Canon saw it would not be,
But that his Yeoman would tell his secrets,
He fled away for true sorrow and shame.
"Ah!" said the Yeoman, "here shall arise some amusement;
Right now I will tell all that I know.
Since he is gone, may the foul fiend kill him!
For never hereafter will I meet with him 
For penny nor for pound, I promise you.
He who brought me first unto that game,
Before he dies, may he have sorrow and shame!
For it is serious (not game) to me, by my faith;
That feel I well, whatever any man says.
And yet, for all my pain and all my grief,
For all my sorrow, labor, and mischief,
I could never leave it in any way.
Now I wish to God my wit might suffice
To tell all that belongs to that art!
But nonetheless you desire that I tell part.
Since my lord is gone, I will not spare;
Such things as what I know, I will declare.
With this Canon I have dwelt seven years,
And as to his science I am never the nearer (to success).
All that I had I have lost thereby,
And, God knows, so have many more than I.
Where I was accustomed to be right fresh and gay
Of clothing and of other splendid furnishings,
Now may I wear a hose upon my head;
And whereas my color was both fresh and red,
Now is it pale and of a leaden hue --
Whoever uses it (that art), sorely shall he rue! --
And by my work yet my eye is bleared.
Lo, how profitable it is to transute metals!
That slippery science has made me so bare 
That I have no possessions, wherever I fare;
And yet by this I am so indebted 
For gold that I have borrowed, truly,
That while I live I shall never repay it.
Let every man be warned by me forever!
Whatever sort of man that applies himself to that,
If he continue, I consider his prosperity done for.
For so help me God, he shall not profit thereby,
But empty his purse and make his wits thin.
And when he through his madness and folly
Has lost his own possessions in this dangerous business,
Then he incites other folk to that,
To lose their possessions as he himself has done.
For unto scoundrels it is joy and ease
To have their fellows in pain and hardship.
Thus was I once taught by a clerk.
No matter about that; I will speak of our work.
When we are where we shall exercise
Our mysterious craft, we seem wonderfully wise,
Our terms are so scholarly and so strange.
I blow the fire until my heart faints.
Why should I tell each proportion
Of the things that we work upon --
As on five or six ounces, it may well be,
Of silver, or some other quantity --
And busy myself to tell you the names
Of orpiment (arsenic trisulfide), burned bones, iron flakes,
That are ground into very fine powder;
And how all is put in an earthen pot,
And salt put in, and also pepper,
Before these powders that I speak of here;
And well covered with a lamp-shaped vessel of glass;
And of many other things which were there;
And sealing of the pot and glasses
So that not a bit of the air could pass out;
And of the slow fir, and fast also,
Which was made, and of the care and woe
That we had in purifying our materials,
And in blending and reducing to powder
Of quicksilver, called raw mercury?
Despite all our tricks we can not succeed.
Our orpiment (arsenic trisulfide), and purified mercury,
Our litharge (lead monoxide) ground also on the porphyry mortar,
A certain number of ounces of each of these --
Nothing helps us; our labor is in vain.
Also neither our spirit's vaporization,
Nor our materials that remain fixed in the pot,
Can in any way help us in our working,
For all our labor and travail is lost;
And all the expenditure, in the name of twenty devils,
Which we spent upon it, is lost also.
There is also very many another thing
That pertains unto our craft.
Though I can not list them in their proper order,
Because I am an unlearned man,
Yet will I tell them as they come to mind,
Though I can not set them in their proper categories:
Such as armenian bol (red clay), verdigris (copper acetate), borax,
And various vessels made of clay and glass,
Our urinals and our retorts,
Vials, crucibles, and sublimation vessels,
Vessels for distilling and alembics also,
And other such things, very expensive at the price of a leek --
There ia no need to list them all --
Liquids that cause reddening, and bull's gall,
Arsenic, sal ammoniac, and brimstone;
And herbs could I tell also many a one,
Such as agrimony, valerian, and moonwort,
And other such things, if I wanted to tarry;
Our lamps burning both night and day,
To bring about our purpose, if we can;
Also our furnace for reducing substances to powder,
And of whitening by liquids;
Unslaked lime, chalk, and white of an egg,
Various powders, ashes, dung, piss, and clay,
Waxed (waterproofed) packets, saltpeter, sulphuric acid,
And various sorts of fires made of wood and coal;
Potassium nitrate, alkali, and purified salt,
And burned materials and solidified;
Clay made with horse or man's hair, and oil
Of tartar, crystallized alum, yeast, unfermented malt, and argol,
Arsenic, and soaking our materials,
And also of forming a compound of our materials,
And of turning our silver to a yellow color,
Our fusion by heat and fermentation,
Our casting molds, crucibles for testing, and many more.
I will tell you, as it was taught also to me,
The four spirits and the seven metals
By order, as often I heard my lord name them.
The first spirit is called quicksilver,
The second orpiment (arsenic trisulfide), the third, indeed,
Sal ammoniac, and the fourth brimstone.
The seven metals also, lo, hear them now:
Sun is gold, and Moon silver we say,
Mars iron, Mercury we call quicksilver,
Saturn lead, and Jupiter is tin,
And Venus copper, by my father's kin!
Whoever will exercise this cursed craft,
He shall have no wealth that can be enough for him,
For all the wealth he spends on this
He shall lose; of that have I no doubt.
Whoever desires to make public his folly,
Let him come forth and learn to transmute base metals;
And every man that has anything in his strong-box,
Let him appear and become an alchemist.
Is that craft were so easy to learn?
Nay, nay, God knows, be he monk or friar,
Priest or canon, or any other creature,
Though he sit at his book both day and night
In learning of this mysterious foolish lore,
All is in vain, and by God, much more.
To teach an ignorant man this ingenious skill --
Fie! Speak not about that, for it will not be.
And know he book learning or know he none,
In fact, he shall find it all the same.
For both of the two, by my salvation,
Conclude in transmutation
Equally well, when they are all done;
This is to say, they fail, both of the two.
Yet I forgot to make enumeration 
Of acidic waters, and of metal filings,
And of the softening of materials,
And also of their hardening;
Oils, cleansings, and fusible metal --
To tell all would be longer than any large book
That is anywhere; therefore, as for the best,
Of all these names now I will rest myself,
For, as I believe, I have told you enough
To raise a fiend, though he look never so rough.
Ah! Nay! Let be; the philosophers' stone,
Called Elixir, we seek earnestly each one of us;
For if we had it, then we would be very well off.
But unto God of heaven I make avow,
Despite all our craft, when we have all done,
And all our skill, he will not come us to.
He has made us spend much money,
For sorrow of which we almost go mad,
Except that good hope creeps into our heart,
Supposing ever, though we sorely suffer,
To be relieved by him afterward.
Such supposing and hope is sharp and hard;
I warn you well, it is to keep seeking forever.
That future tense has made men to be separated,
In trust on that, from all that ever they had.
Yet of that art they can not be satisfied,
For unto them it is a bitter sweet --
So it seems -- for had they nothing but a sheet
Which they might wrap themselves in at night,
And a rough cloak to walk in by daylight,
They would sell them and spend it on this craft.
They can not stop until nothing is left.
And evermore, wherever they go,
Men can know them by the smell of brimstone.
For all the world they stink like a goat;
Their odor is so like a goat and so intense
That though a man be a mile from them,
The odor will infect him, trust me.
Lo, thus by smelling and threadbare array,
If men so desire, this folk they can know.
And if a man will ask them privily
Why they are clothed so poorly,
They right away will whisper in his ear,
And say that if they were recognized,
Men would slay them because of their knowledge.
Lo, thus these folk betray innocence!
Pass over this; I go unto my tale.
Before the pot on the fire is done,
With a specific quantity of metals,
My lord tempers them, and no man but he --
Now he is gone, I dare say boldly --
For, as men say, he can work craftily.
Although I know well he has such a reputation;
And yet very often he gets in trouble.
And do you know how? Full often it so happens
The pot shatters, and farewell, all is gone!
These metals are of such great violence
The sides of our vessels can not make resistance to them,
Unless they were made of lime and stone;
They pierce so, and through the wall they go.
And some of them sink into the ground --
Thus have we quickly lost many a pound --
And some are scattered all over the floor;
Some leap into the roof. Without doubt,
Though the fiend does not show himself to our sight,
I believe he is with us, that same scoundrel!
In hell, where he is lord and sire,
There is no greater woe, nor greater rancor nor ire.
When our pot is broken, as I have said,
Every man chides and considers himsef ill used.
Some said it was due to the making of the fire;
Some said nay, it was due to the blowing --
Then was I afraid, for that was my job.
"Rubbish!" said the third, "you are ignorant and foolish.
It was not tempered as it ought to be."
"Nay," said the fourth, "be quiet and listen to me.
Because our fire was not made of beech,
That is the cause and none other, as I may prosper!"
I can not tell what it was due to,
But well I know great strife is among us.
"Well," said my lord, "there is no more to do;
Of these perils I will be wary next time.
I am very sure that the pot was cracked.
Be as be may, be you in no way amazed;
As our practice is, have the floor quickly swept,
Pluck up your hearts and be glad and blithe."
The rubbish was swept in a heap,
And on the floor was cast a canvas,
And all this rubbish thrown in a sieve 
And sifted, and picked over many a time.
"By God," said one, "something of our metal
Yet is there here, though we have not all.
And though this thing may have turned out badly this time,
Another time it may go well indeed.
We must put our possessions at risk.
A merchant, by God, may not endure forever,
Trust me well, in his prosperity.
Sometimes his goods are drowned in the sea,
And sometime they come safely unto the land."
"Quiet!" said my lord, "the next time I will endeavor
To bring our experiment to an entirely different state,
And unless I do, sirs, let me have the blame.
There was something wrong, I well know."
Another said the fire was too hot --
But, be it hot or cold, I dare say this,
That we conclude always with something gone wrong.
We fail to get that which we want to have,
And in our madness always we rave.
And when we are all together every one,
Every man seems a Solomon.
But every thing thah shines like gold
Is not gold, as I have heard said;
Nor every apple that is fair to the eye
Is not good, whatever men may chatter or cry.
Right so, lo, it fares among us:
He who seems the wisest, by Jesus,
Is the greatest fool, when it comes to the proof;
And he that seems truest is a thief.
That shall you know, before I from you wend,
By the time that I have made an end of my tale.
There is a canon regular
Amongst us, who would infect a whole town,
Though it were as big as was Nineveh,
Rome, Alexandria, Troy, and any three others.
His tricks and his infinite falseness
No man could write, as I guess,
Though he might live a thousand years.
In all this world is not his equal in falsehood,
For in his technical terms he will so wrap himself,
And speak his words in so deceitful a manner,
When he shall converse with any person,
That he will make a fool of him right away,
Unless it be a fiend, as he himself is.
Very many a man has he beguiled before this,
And will, if he may live a while longer;
And yet men ride and walk very many a mile
To seek him and have his acquaintance,
Not knowing of his false way of life.
And if you want to listen to me,
I will tell it here in your presence.
But worshipful religious canons,
Do not think that I slander your house,
Although my tale be about a canon.
There is some scoundrel in every order, by God,
And God forbid that a whole company
Should suffer for one single man's folly.
To slander you is not at all my intention,
But I mean to correct what is amiss.
This tale was not only told for you,
But also for many others; you know well 
That among Christ's twelve apostles 
There was no traitor but Judas himself.
Then why should all the remnant have the blame
Who were guiltless? Concerning you I say the same,
Save only this, if you will listen to me:
If any Judas be in your convent,
Remove him quickly, I advise you,
If the prospect of shame or dishonor can cause any fear.
And be not at all displeased, I pray you,
But in this case listen to what I shall say.
In London was a priest, a chantry priest,
Who therein had dwelled many a year,
Who was so pleasant and so attentive
Unto the woman, where he took his meals,
That she would not allow him to pay anything
For board nor clothing, went he never so gay,
And he had plenty of spending money.
That does not not matter; I will now proceed,
And tell forth my tale of the canon
Who brought this priest to ruin.
This false canon came upon one day
Unto this priest's chamber, where he stayed,
Beseeching him to lend him a certain amount
Of gold, and he would pay it back to him again.
"Loan me a mark," said he, "for only three days,
And at my assigned day I will repay it to thee.
And if it so be that thou find me false,
The next day have me hanged by the neck!"
This priest gave him a mark, and that very quickly,
And this canon thanked him many times,
And took his leave, and went forth on his way,
And at the third day brought his money,
And to the priest he gave back his gold,
For which this priest was wonderfully glad and happy.
"Certainly," said he, "in no way does it annoy me
To lend a man a noble, or two, or three,
Or whatever thing if it were in my possession,
When he is so true, of such character
That in no way will he fail to pay on his assigned day:
To such a man I can never say no."
"What!" said this canon, "should I be untrue?
Nay, that would be a thing completely without precedent.
My pledged word is a thing that I will always keep
Until that day in which I shall creep
Into my grave, and God forbid it be otherwise.
Believe this is as true as your Creed.
I thank God, and rightly it may be said,
That there was never man yet suffered evil
For gold or silver that he lent to me,
Nor did I ever intend falsehood in my heart.
And sir," said he, "now some of my secrets,
Since you have been so goodly unto me,
And shown to me such great courtesy,
Something with which to repay your kindness
I will show you, and if you want to learn,
I will teach you fully the manner
How I know how to to work in alchemy.
Pay cl,ose attention; you shall well see by eye
That I will do a masterful work before I go."
"Yes," said the priest, "yes, sir, and will you so?
By Saint Mary, for that I pray you heartily."
"At your commandment, sir, truly,"
Said the canon, "and otherwise God forbid!"
Lo, how this thief could offer his service!
Very true it is that such a favor not asked for
Stinks, as these old wise writers bear witness,
And very soon I will verify it
In (the deeds of) this canon, root of all treachery,
Who evermore has delight and gladness --
Such fiendish thoughts in his heart are fixed --
How he can bring Christ's people to mischief.
God keep us from his false dissimulation!
This priest knew not with whom he dealt,
And of his coming harm he felt nothing.
O hapless priest! O hapless innocent!
Very soon thou shalt be blinded by greed!
O unfortunate, completely blind is thy mind,
In no way art thou aware of the deceit
Which this fox has destined for thee!
His cunning deceptions thou canst not flee.
Therefore, to go to the conclusion,
That refers to thy ruin,
Unhappy man, right now I will hasten myself
To tell thy lack of prudence and thy folly,
And also the falseness of that other wretch,
Insofar as my skill will stretch.
This canon was my lord, you would suppose?
Sir host, in faith, and by the heaven's queen,
It was another canon, and not he,
Who knows a hundred times more trickery.
He has betrayed folks many a time;
It distresses me to compose rimes about his falseness.
Every time I speak of his falsehood,
For shame of him my cheeks grow red.
At least they begin to glow,
For redness have I none, very well I know,
In my visage; for various fumes
Of metals, which you have heard me rehearse,
That have consumed and wasted my redness.
Now pay attention to this canon's cursedness!
"Sir," said he to the priest, "have your man go
For quicksilver, would that we had it right now;
And have him bring two or three ounces;
And when he comes, quickly you shall see
A wonderful thing, which you never saw before this."
"Sir," said the priest, "it shall be done, indeed."
He bad his servant fetch him this thing,
And he was all ready at his bidding,
And went forth, and came right back again
With this quicksilver, shortly to say,
And gave these three ounces to the canon;
And he laid them down neatly and carefully,
And bad the servant to bring coals,
So that he might go to his working right away.
The coals right away were fetched,
And this canon took out a crucible
From his bosom, and showed it to the priest.
"This instrument," said he, "which thou seest,
Take in thy hand, and thyself put therein
An ounce of this quicksilver, and here begin,
In the name of Christ, to become an alchemist.
There are very few to whom I would offer
To show them thus so much of my science.
For you shall see here, by experience,
That this quicksilver I will harden
Right in your sight indeed, without lie,
And make it as good silver and as fine
As there is any in your purse or mine,
Or elsewhere, and make it malleable;
And otherwise consider me false and unable
For ever to appear amongst folk.
I have a powder here, that cost me dearly,
Shall make all good, for it is cause of all
My cunning, which I shall show you.
Send away your man, and have him be outside,
And shut the door, while we are about
Our secret business, so that no man espy us,
While we work in this science."
All was in deed fulfilled as he commanded.
This same servant right away went out,
And his master shut the door quickly,
And to their labor speedily they go.
This priest, at this cursed canon's bidding,
Upon the fire at once set this thing,
And blew the fire, and busied himself very intently.
And this canon into the crucible cast
A powder, I do not know of what it was
Made, either of chalk, or of glass,
Or something else, that was not worth a fly,
With which to blind this priest; and bade him hasten
To lay all the coals above
The crucible. "To serve as a sign that I love thee,"
Said this canon, "thine own two hands
Shall do every thing that shall here be done."
"Many thanks," said the priest, and was very glad,
And laid the coals as the canon bad.
And while he was busy, this fiendish wretch,
This false canon -- may the foul fiend fetch him! --
Out of his bosom took a beech coal,
In which very skilfully was made a hole,
And therein was put of silver filings
An ounce, and was sealed shut, without doubt, 
This hole with wax, to keep the filings in.
And understand that this false device
Was not made there, but it was made before;
And other things I shall tell more
Later, which he brought with him.
Before he came there, he intended to trick him,
And so he did, before they went apart;
Until he had skinned him, he could not cease.
It distresses me when I speak of him.
I would like to avenge myself for his falsehood,
If I knew how, but he is now here and now there;
He is so changeable, he abides nowhere.
But pay attention now, sirs, for God's love!
He took his coal of which I spoke above,
And in his hand he bore it secretly.
And while the priest busily laid
The coals, as I told you before this,
This canon said, "Friend, you do it wrong.
This is not arranged as it ought to be;
But soon I shall amend it," said he.
"Now let me work with it but a while,
For I have pity of you, by Saint Gile!
You are very hot; I see well how you sweat.
Have here a cloth, and wipe away the wetness."
And while the priest wiped his face,
This canon took his coal -- may he have bad luck! --
And laid it above, upon the middle
Of the crucible, and blew well afterward
Until the coals began to burn fast.
"Now give us drink," said the canon then;
"Soon all shall be well, I guarantee.
Sit we down, and let us make merry."
And when this canon's beech coal
Was burned, all the filings out of the hole
Into the crucible fell right down;
And so it must be necessarily, by reason,
Since it was placed so exactly above.
But of this the priest knew nothing, alas!
He thought all the coals equally good,
For he understood nothing of that trick.
And when this alchemist saw his time,
"Rise up," said he, "sir priest, and stand by me;
And because I know well you have no ingot,
Go, walk forth, and bring a chalk stone;
For I will make it of the same shape
As is an ingot, if I may have such luck.
And bring also with you a bowl or a pan
Full of water, and you shall see well then
How our business shall thrive and succeed.
And yet, so that you shall have no suspicion
Nor wrong opinion of me in your absence,
I will not be out of your presence,
But go with you and come with you again."
The chamber door, shortly to say,
They opened and shut, and went their way.
And forth with them they carried the key,
And came back again without any delay.
Why should I tarry all the long day?
He took the chalk and shaped it in the manner
Of an ingot, as I shall tell you.
I say, he took out of his own sleeve
A small bar of silver -- may he have evil luck! --
Which was not more than an ounce of weight.
And pay attention now to his cursed trick!
He shaped his ingot in the length and in the breadth
Of this small bar, without any doubt,
So slyly that the priest did not see it, 
And in his sleeve again he did hide it,
And from the fire he took up his material,
And put it in the ingot with merry demeanor,
And in the pan of water he cast it,
When it pleased him, and commanded the priest quickly,
"See what is there; put in thy hand and grope.
Thou shalt find there silver, as I believe."
What else, devil of hell, should it be?
Shaving of silver is silver, by God!
He put his hand in and took up a small bar
Of pure silver, and glad in every vein
Was this priest, when he saw it was so.
"God's blessing, and his mother's also,
And all saints, have you (in their protection), sir canon,"
Said the priest, "and may I have their curse,
But, if you condescend to teach me
This noble craft and this esoteric art,
I will be yours in all that ever I can."
Said the canon, "Yet I will make trial 
The second time, that you may pay attention
And be expert concerning this, and when you are in need
Some other day in my absence to try out
This discipline and this ingenious science.
Let's take another ounce," said he then,
"Of quicksilver, without more words,
And do therewith as you have done before this
With that other, which now is silver."
This priest busies himself in all that he knows how
To do as this canon, this cursed man,
Commanded him, and blew hard on the fire,
In order to come to the realization of his desire.
And this canon, at exactly the same time,
Was all ready to beguile this priest again,
And for show in his hand he bore
A hollow stick -- pay attention and beware! --
In the end of which an ounce, and no more,
Of silver filings was put, as before
Was in his coal, and well sealed shut with wax
To keep in his filings every bit.
And while this priest was busy with his work,
This canon with his stick began to go
To him right away, and his powder cast in
As he did before-- the devil out of his skin
Flay him, I pray to God, for his falsehood!
For he was ever false in thought and deed --
And with this stick, above the crucible,
That was prepared with that false contrivance,
He stirred the coals until it began to melt
The wax next to the fire, as every man,
Unless he be a fool, knows well it must by necessity,
And all that was in the stick went out,
And into the crucible it quickly fell.
Now, good sirs, what more will you have?
When this priest was thus beguiled again,
Supposing nothing but truth, sooth to say,
He was so glad that I can not express
In any manner his mirth and his gladness;
And to the canon he offered again
Body and possessions. "Yes," quickly said the canon,
"Though I be poor, thou shalt find me skilfull.
I warn thee, there is yet more to come.
Is there any copper here?" said he.
"Yes," said the priest, "sir, I believe well there is some."
"Otherwise go buy us some, and do that quickly;
Now, good sir, go forth thy way and hurry thee."
He went his way, and with the copper came back,
And this canon took it in his hands,
And of that copper weighed out only an ounce.
All too simple is my tongue to pronounce,
As servant of my wit, the duplicity
Of this canon, root of all cursedness!
He seemed friendly to those that did not know him,
But he was fiendish both in deed and thought.
It wearies me to tell of his falseness,
And nonetheless I will yet express it,
With the intention that men may be warned by this,
And for no other cause, truly.
He put this ounce of copper in the crucible,
And on the fire quickly he has set it,
And cast in powder, and made the priest to blow,
And in his working to stoop low,
As he did before -- and all was nothing but a trick;
Exactly as he wished, he made the priest his ape!
And afterward he cast the ingot in it,
And put it at the last into the pan 
Of water, and in he put his own hand,
And in his sleeve (as you before-hand
Heard me tell) he had a small bar of silver.
He slyly took it out, this cursed rascal,
This priest not knowing of his false craft,
And in the pan's bottom he has left it;
And in the water groped noisily about to and fro,
And wonderfully secretly took up also 
The copper bar, this priest not knowing,
And hid it, and grabbed him by his coat,
And to him spoke, and thus said jokingly:
"Stoop down. By God, you are to blame!
Help me now, as I did you before;
Put in your hand, and see what is there."
This priest quickly took up this silver bar,
And then said the canon, "Let us go
With these three bars, which we have wrought,
To some goldsmith and learn if they are worth anything,
For, by my faith, I would not (have them), for (the cost of) my hood,
Unless they be silver pure and good,
And that very quickly shall be tested."
Unto the goldsmith with these three bars
They went and put these bars to the test
Of fire and hammer; no man could say nay,
But that they were as they ought to be.
This deluded priest, who was gladder than he?
Was never bird more glad at daybreak,
Nor nightingale in the season of May,
Was never none that was more eager to sing;
Nor lady more enthusiastic in singing carols to spring,
Or to speak of love and womanhood,
Nor knight in arms to do a hardy deed,
To stand in the good graces of his dear lady,
Than this priest had to learn this sorry craft.
And to the canon thus he spoke and said:
"For love of God, Who died for us all,
And as I may deserve (to have) it from you,
What shall this recipe cost? Tell now!"
"By our Lady," said this canon, "it is expensive,
I warn you well; for except for me and a friar,
There is no man in England who can make it."
"No matter," said he, "now, sir, for God's sake,
What shall I pay? Tell me, I pray."
"Indeed," said he, "as I say, it is very expensive.
Sir, at one word, if thou want to have it,
You must pay forty pounds, so help me God!
And were it not for the act of friendship that before this you did
To me, you should pay more, indeed."
This priest right away the sum of forty pounds 
Of nobles fetched, and gave every one of them
To this canon for this same recipe.
All his working was nothing but fraud and deceit.
"Sir priest," he said, "I do not care to have fame
For my craft, for I would that it were kept confidential;
And, as you love me, keep it secret.
For, if men knew of all my esoteric skill,
By God, they would have so great envy
Of me because of my science
I should be dead; there would be no other way."
"God forbid it," said the priest, "what say you?
Yet would I rather spend all the wealth
That I have, and otherwise I would rather go mad,
Than that you should fall in such distress."
"For your good will, sir, you have givem right good proof,"
Said the canon, "and farewell, many thanks!"
He went his way, and never the priest him saw
After that day; and when this priest should
At such time as he wanted, make a trial 
Of this recipe, farewell! It would not work.
Lo, thus tricked and beguiled was he!
Thus he makes his introductory gambit,
To bring folk to their destruction.
Consider, sirs, how, in each social rank,
Betwixt men and gold there is conflict 
So widespread that there is hardly any gold left.
This transmutation blinds so many a one
That in good faith I believe that it is
The greatest cause of such scarcity.
Philosophers speak so mystically
About this craft that men can not come to it,
For any wit that men have now-a-days.
They may well chatter as do jays,
And in their technical terms set their desire and pain,
But to their purpose shall they never attain.
A man can easily learn, if he have anything,
To transmute metals, and bring his wealth to nothing!
Lo! such a profit is in this pleasing game,
It will turn a man's mirth into sorrow,
And empty also great and heavy purses,
And make folk to deserve curses
Of those who have lent their wealth for that purpose.
O, fie, for shame! Those who have been burned,
Alas, can they not flee the fire's heat?
You who use it, I advise you let it go,
Lest you lose all; for late is better than never.
Never to thrive would be too long a time.
Though you search forever, you shall never find it.
You are as heedless as is Bayard the blind horse,
That blunders forth and takes account of no peril.
He is as likely to run against a stone
As to go around it in the road.
So fare you who multiply, I say.
If your eyes can not see clearly,
See that your mind lacks nothing of its sight.
For though you look never so broadly and stare,
You shall gain nothing on that transaction,
But waste all that you can steal and carry away.
Withdraw the fire, lest it burn too fast;
Meddle no more with that art, I mean,
For if you do, your prosperity is completely gone.
And very quickly I will you tell here
What alchemists say in this matter.
Lo, thus says Arnold of the New Town,
As his book Rosari makes mention;
He says right thus, without any lie:
"There is no man who can harden mercury 
Unless it be with his brother's knowledge";
Although he who first said this thing
Was father of philosophers, Hermes Trismegistus;
He says that the dragon, doubtless,
Does not die unless he be slain
By his brother; and that is to say,
By the dragon, Mercury, and none other
He understood, and brimstone by his brother,
That out of Sol (gold) and Luna (silver) were drawn.
"And therefore," said he -- take heed of my words --
"Let no man busy himself to seek this art,
Unless he the meaning and speech
Of alchemists can understand;
And if he do, he is an ignorant man.
For this science and this cunning," said he,
"Concerns the secret of the secrets, by God."
Also there was a disciple of Plato,
That one time said to his master,
As his book Senior will bear witness,
And this was his question in truth:
"Tell me the name of the secret stone."
And Plato answered unto him straightaway,
"Take the stone that men name Titanos."
"What is that?" said he. "Magnesia is the same,"
Said Plato. "Yes, sir, and is it thus?
This is explaining the unknown by the more unknown.
What is Magnesia, good sir, I pray you?"
"It is a liquid that is made, I say,
Of the four elements," said Plato.
Good sir," said he then, "Tell me the basic constituent
"Of that liquid, if it be your wish."
"Nay, nay," said Plato, "certainly, that I will not.
The alchemists were sworn every single one
That they should reveal it unto no one,
Nor in any book write it in any way.
For unto Christ it is so beloved and dear
That He does not wish that it be discovered,
Except where it is pleasing to his deity
To enlighten men, and also to forbid
Whomever he pleases; lo, this is the end."
Then I conclude thus, since God of heaven
Does not wish that the alchemists should tell
How a man shall come unto this stone,
I advise, as for the best, let it go.
For whoever makes God his adversary,
As to do any thing in contrary
To his will, certainly, never shall he thrive,
Though he practice alchemy all his life.
And there (put) a period, for my tale is ended.
God send every true man remedy for his troubles!
