Once there was dwelling in my country
An archdeacon, a man of high rank,
That boldly carried out the law
In punishment of fornication,
Of witchcraft, and also of pandering,
Of defamation of character, and adultery,
Of robbing churches, and of wills,
Of marriage contracts and of failure to take the sacraments,
Of usury, and of simony also.
But certainly, to lechers did he the greatest woe;
They had to sing out in pain if they were taken;
And those who paid less than full tithes were severely punished,
If any parson would complain about them.
There could escape him no monetary punishment (fine).
For small tithes and for small offering
He made the people piteously to sing out in pain,
For ere the bishop caught them with his crozier,
They were in the archdeacon's book.
Then had he, throughout his jurisdiction,
Power to have them punished.
He had a summoner ready at his hand;
No one in England was a more clever rascal;
For deviously he had his network of spies,
That showed him well where there might be profit for him.
He could spare one or two of the lechers,
To direct him to four and twenty more.
For though this Summoner were mad as a hare,
To tell his wickedness I will not desist;
For we are exempt from his authority.
They have over us no jurisdiction,
Nor never shall, until the end of all their lives.
"By St. Peter! so are women of the brothels,"
Said the Summoner, "put out of our jurisdiction!"
"Quiet! with bad luck and with misfortune to you!"
Thus said our Host, "and let him tell his tale.
Now tell forth, though the Summoner loudly complain;
And tell everything, my own master dear."
This false thief, this summoner, said the Friar,
Had always pimps as ready to his hand,
As any hawk to come to the lure in England,
Who told him all the secrets that they knew,
For their acquaintance was not come recently.
They were secretly his agents.
He got himself a great profit in this way;
His master knew not always what he earned.
Without an actual summons an ignorant man
He could summon, on pain of excommunication,
And they were glad to fill his purse
And make him great feasts at the ale-house.
And just as Judas had small amounts of the apostles' money,
And was a thief, exactly such a thief was he;
His master had but half the amount due to him.
He was, if I shall give him his due praise,
A thief, and also a summoner, and a pimp.
He had also wenches in his employ,
That, whether sir Robert or sir Huwe,
Or Jakke, or Rauf, or whoever it was
That lay by them, they told it in his ear.
Thus were the wench and he in agreement,
And he would fetch a forged court order,
And summon both of them to the archdeacon's court,
And rob the man, and let the wench go.
Then would he say, "Friend, I shall for thy sake
Have her stricken out of our records;
Thou need trouble thyself no more in this case.
I am thy friend, where I can help thee."
Certainly he knew of more ways of stealing
Than is possible to tell in two years.
For in this world is no hunting dog
That can know a hurt deer from a whole one
Better than this summoner knew a sly lecher,
Or an adulterer, or a concubine.
And because that was the best part of all his income,
Therefore on it he set all his intention.
And it so befell that once on a day
This summoner, ever lying in ambush for his prey,
Rode to summon an old widow, an old crone,
Pretending to have a case against her, for he wanted a bribe.
And it happened that he saw before him ride
A gay yeoman, alongside the edge of a forest.
A bow he bore, and arrows bright and keen;
He had upon him a short jacket of green,
A hat upon his head with fringes black.
"Sir," said this summoner, "hail, and well met!"
"Welcome," said he, "and every good fellow!
Where ridest thou, alongside this green wood?"
Said this yeoman, "Wilt thou travel far today?"
This summoner him answered and said, "Nay;
Here close by," said he, "is my intention
To ride, to collect a rent
That belongs to my lord's due income."
"Art thou then a bailiff?" "Yes," said he.
He dared not, for the true filth and shame
Of the name, say that he was a summoner.
"By God," said this yeoman, "dear brother,
Thou art a bailiff, and I am another.
I am unknown in this country;
Of thine acquaintance I would pray thee,
And also of brotherhood, if you wish.
I have gold and silver in my chest;
If thou happen to come in our shire,
All shall be thine, just as thou wilt desire."
"Great thanks," said this summoner, "by my faith!"
Each in other's hand pledges his troth,
To be sworn brothers until they die.
In pleasant conversation they ride forth and amuse themselves.
This summoner, who was as full of idle speech
As full of venom are these butcherbirds
And ever inquiring about every thing,
"Brother," said he, "where is now your dwelling
If I should seek you another day?"
This yeoman him answered in gentle words,
"Brother," said he, "far in the north country,
Where I hope some time I shall thee see.
Ere we depart, I shall thee so well instruct
That thou shalt never miss my house."
"Now, brother," said this summoner, "I you pray,
Teach me, while we ride by the way,
Since you are a bailiff as am I,
Some trickery, and tell me faithfully
In my occupation how I may most profit;
And spare not for conscience nor sin,
But as my brother tell me, how you do your business."
"Now, by my troth, brother dear," said he,
"I shall tell thee a true tale,
My wages are very scanty and very small.
My lord is hard to me and niggardly,
And my job is very hard work,
And therefore by extortions I live.
For truly, I take all that men will me give.
In every way, by trickery or by violence,
From year to year I earn all my expenses.
I can no better tell, truthfully."
"Now certainly," said this Summoner, "I do the same.
I do not desist from taking anything, God knows,
Unless it be too heavy or too hot.
What I can get in private secretly,
No sort of pangs of conscience for that have I.
Were it not for my extortion, I could not live,
Nor of such tricks will I be confessed.
Stomach (compassion) nor conscience know I none;
I curse these confessors every one.
Well are we met, by God and by Saint James!
But, dear brother, tell me then thy name,"
Said this summoner. Meanwhile
This yeoman began a little to smile.
"Brother," said he, "wilt thou that I thee tell?
I am a fiend; my dwelling is in hell,
And here I ride about on my acquisition of profits,
To know whether men will give me any thing.
What I acquire is the total of all my income.
Look how thou ridest for the same purpose,
To make a profit, thou carest never how;
Right so do I, for I would ride now
Unto the world's end for a prey."
"Ah!" said this summoner, "bless me! What say you?
I supposed you were truly a yeoman.
You have a man's shape as well as I;
Have you then a definite form
In hell, where you are in your usual condition?"
"Nay, certainly," said he, "there have we none;
But when we like we can take us one,
Or else make it seem to you we are so shaped;
Sometimes like a man, or like an ape,
Or like an angel can I ride or walk about.
It is no wonderful thing though it be so;
A lousy conjurer can deceive thee,
And by God, yet I know more craft than he."
"Why," said this summoner, "ride you then or walk about
In various shapes, and not always in one?"
"Because we," said he, "will make us such forms
As are most suitable for taking our prey."
"What makes you to have all this labor?"
"Very many a cause, dear sir summoner,"
Said this fiend, "but every thing has its time.
The day is short, and it is past nine a.m.,
And yet I gained nothing in this day.
I will concentrate on profit, if I may,
And not attend to explaining our mental abilities.
For, brother mine, thy wit is all too bare
To understand, even though I told them to thee.
But, since thou askest why labor we --
For sometimes we are God's instruments
And means to do his commandments,
When he wishes, upon his creatures,
In various methods and in various appearances.
Without him we have no power, certainly,
If he wishes to stand against us.
And sometimes, at our prayer, have we leave
Only the body and not the soul to grieve;
Take the evidence of Job, to whom we did woe.
And sometimes have we power over both of the two --
This is to say, of soul and body as well.
And sometimes we are allowed to harass
A man and do his soul distress
And not his body, and all is for the best.
When he withstands our temptation,
It is a cause of his salvation,
Although it was not our intention
He should be saved, but that we wanted to seize him.
And sometimes we are servants unto a man,
As to the archbishop Saint Dunstan,
And to the apostles I was also a servant."
"Yet tell me," said the summoner, "truly,
Do you make yourself new bodies thus always
Of elements?" The fiend answered, "Nay.
Sometime we dissemble, and sometimes we arise
With dead bodies, in very many manners,
And speak as readily and faire and well
As to the Phitonissa (Witch of Endor) did Samuel.
(And yet will some men say it was not he;
I put no store in your theology.)
But one thing I warn thee, I will not deceive you:
Thou want especially to know how we are shaped;
Thou shalt hereafter, my brother dear,
Come where thou need not to learn from me,
For thou shalt, by thine own experience,
Be able in a professorial chair to lecture on this subject
Better than Virgil, while he was alive,
Or Dante also. Now let us ride quickly,
For I will hold company with thee
Until it be that thou forsake me."
"Nay," said this summoner, "that shall not happen!
I am a yeoman, as is very widely known;
My troth will I keep, in this case.
For though thou were the devil Satan,
My troth will I hold to my brother,
As I am sworn, and each of us to the other,
To be true brother in this case;
And we both go about our acquisitions.
Take thou thy part, whatever men will thee give,
And I shall mine; thus may we both live.
And if one of us have more than the other,
Let him be true and share it with his brother."
"I grant," said the devil, "by my faith."
And with that word they ride forth their way.
And right at the entrance of the town,
To which this summoner planned to go
They saw a cart that was loaded with hay,
Which a carter drove forth in his way.
Deep in mud was the road, for which the cart stood still.
The carter smote and cried as if he were crazy,
"Giddap, Brok! Giddap, Scot! Why do you stop pulling for the stones?
The fiend," said he, "fetch you, body and bones,
As surely as ever you were born,
So much woe as I have with you suffered!
The devil have all, both horses and cart and hay!"
This summoner said, "Here shall we have some fun."
And nearer the fiend he drew, as if it were nothing,
Very discreetly, and whispered in his ear:
"Hearken, my brother, hearken, by thy faith!
Hearest thou not what the carter says?
Seize it at once, for he has given it to thee,
Both hay and cart, and also his three horses."
"Nay," said the devil, "God knows, never a bit!
It is not his intention, trust me well.
Ask him thyself, if thou not believe me;
Or else wait a while, and thou shalt see."
This carter whacks his horses upon the hindquarters,
And they began to pull and to stoop.
"Giddap! Now," said he, "may Jesus Christ you bless,
And all his handiwork, both more and less!
That was well pulled, my own dappled boy.
I pray God save thee, and Saint Loy!
Now is my cart out of the mud, by God!"
"Lo, brother," said the fiend, "what told I thee?
Here may you see, my own dear brother,
The churl spoke one thing, but he thought another.
Let us go forth on our undertaking;
Here gain I nothing from a tax on horse and cart."
When they came a short way out of town,
This summoner to his brother began to whisper:
"Brother," said he, "here dwells an old crone
Who would be almost as willing to lose her neck
As to give up a penny of her goods.
I will have twelve pence, even if she be driven mad,
Or I will summon her unto our court;
And yet, God knows, of her know I no vice.
But since thou can not, in this country,
Earn thy living, learn here by my example."
This summoner knocks at the widow's gate.
"Come out," said he, "thou old hag!
I believe thou hast some friar or priest with thee."
"Who knocks?" said this wife, "bless me!
God save you, sir, what is your sweet will?"
"I have," said he, "here a writ of summons;
Upon pain of excommunication, look that thou be
Tomorrow morning before the archdeacon's knee
To answer to the court about certain things."
"Now, Lord," said she, "Christ Jesus, king of kings,
Surely help me, since I can not.
I have been sick, and that full many a day.
I can not walk so far," said she, "nor ride,
Without being dead, it so pains in my side.
May I not ask for a written copy of the charge, sir summoner,
And answer there by my representative
To such thing as men will bring against me?"
"Yes," said this summoner, "pay at once -- let's see --
Twelve pens to me, and I will thee acquit.
I shall have no profit thereby but little;
My master has the profit and not I.
Hurry up, and let me ride hastily;
Give me twelve pens, I can no longer tarry."
"Twelve pence!" said she, "Now, lady Saint Marie
Surely help me out of care and sin,
Though I should gain this wide world (if I had it),
I have not twelve pence within my possession.
You know well that I am poor and old;
Show your charity on me, poor wretch."
"Nay then," said he, "the foul fiend me fetch
If I excuse thee, though thou should be dead!"
"Alas!" said she, "God knows, I have no guilt."
"Pay me," said he, "or by the sweet Saint Anne,
I will carry off thy new pan
For debt which thou owest me since long ago.
When thou madest thine husband cuckold,
I paid at our court the fine for thy punishment."
"Thou lie!" said she, "by my salvation,
I was never ere now, widow nor wife,
Summoned unto your court in all my life;
Nor was I ever anything but true of my body!
Unto the devil black and rough of appearance
Give I thy body and my pan also!"
And when the devil heard her so curse
Upon her knees, he said in this manner,
"Now, Mabely, my own mother dear,
Is this your will in earnest that you say?"
"The devil," said she, "so fetch him ere he die,
And pan and all, unless he will repent!"
"Nay, old slut, that is not my intention,"
Said this summoner, "to repent
For any thing that I have had of thee.
I would I had thy smock and every bit of your clothing!"
"Now, brother," said the devil, "be not angry;
Thy body and this pan are mine by right.
Thou shalt go with me to hell yet tonight,
Where thou shalt know of our secrets
More than a Master of Divinity."
And with that word this foul fiend seized him;
Body and soul he with the devil went
Where summoners have their heritage.
And God, that made after his image
Mankind, save and guide us, one and all,
And grant that these summoners become good men!
Gentlemen, I could have told you, said this Friar,
Had I had been given time by this Summoner here,
According to the text of Christ, Paul, and John,
And of our other doctors of the Church many a one,
Such pains that your hearts might tremble,
Even though no tongue can describe it,
Though I could for a thousand years tell
The pains of that cursed house of hell.
But to keep us from that cursed place,
Keep vigil and pray Jesus for his grace
To protect us from the tempter Satan.
Hearken this word! Beware, as in this case:
"The lion sits in his ambush always
To slay the innocent, if he can."
Dispose always your hearts to withstand
The fiend, who would make you thrall and enslaved.
He may not tempt you beyond your power,
For Christ will be your champion and knight.
And pray that these summoners themselves repent
Of their misdeeds, ere the fiend seize them!
