These old noble Bretons in their days
Of diverse adventures made lays,
Rhymed in their first Breton tongue,
Which lays with their instruments they sang
Or else read them for their pleasure;
And one of them have I in remembrance,
Which I shall say with as good will as I can.
But, sirs, because I am an unlearned man,
At my beginning first I you beseech,
Have me excused for my rude speech.
I learned never rhetoric, certainly;
Thing that I speak, it must be bare and plain.
I slept never on the Mount of Parnassus,
Nor learned Marcus Tullius Cicero.
Colors know I none, without doubt,
But such colors as grow in the field,
Or else such as men dye or paint.
Colors of rhetoric (figures of speech) are strange to me;
My spirit feels nothing of such matter.
But if you wish, you shall hear my tale.
In Armorica, that is called Brittany,
There was a knight that loved and worked hard
To serve a lady in his best manner;
And many a labor, many a great chivalric exploit,
He wrought for his lady before she was won.
For she was the fairest of all under the sun,
And also moreover come of such noble ancestry
That this knight hardly dared, for fear,
Tell her his woe, his pain, and his distress.
But at the last she, for his worthiness,
And namely for his meek submission,
Has taken such a pity on his suffering
That privately she agreed with him
To take him for her husband and hir lord,
Of such lordship as men have over their wives.
And to lead the more blissfully their lives,
Of his free will he swore her as a knight
That never in all his life he, day or night,
Should take upon himself any mastery
Against her will, nor show her jealousy,
But obey her, and follow her will in everything,
As any lover to his lady should,
Except for the appearance of sovereignty,
Which he would have to avoid bringing shame on his status (of knighthood). 
She thanked him, and with full great humbleness
She said, "Sir, since of your nobility
You offer me to have such freedom from restraint,
And would God that never between us two,
Through my fault, should be either war or strife.
Sir, I will be your humble true wife --
Have here my pledge -- until my heart bursts (until I die)." 
Thus are they both in quiet and in peace.
For one thing, sirs, I dare say confidently,
That friends must obey each other,
If they will long hold company.
Love will not be constrained by mastery.
When mastery comes, the God of Love immediately
Beats his wings, and farewell, he is gone!
Love is a thing free as any spirit.
Women, by nature, desire liberty,
And not to be constrained like a slave;
And so do men, if I shall say the truth.
Look who is most patient in love,
He is in the best position, superior to all.
Patience is a noble virtue, certainly,
For it vanquishes, as these clerks say,
Things that rigor should never attain.
One may not chide or complain for every word.
Learn to suffer, or else, as I may walk (I swear),
You shall learn it, whether you want to or not;
For in this world, certainly, there is no person 
Who does not sometime do or speak amiss.
Ire, sickness, or the position of the stars,
Wine, woe, or changing of the balance of bodily humors
Causes (one) very often to do or speak amiss.
On every wrong a man can not be avenged.
There must be moderation suitable to the occasion 
By every person who knows about governance. 
And therefore has this wise, worthy knight,
To live in ease, promised her forbearance,
And she to him full truly did swear
That never should there be fault in her.
Here may men see a humble, wise accord;
Thus has she taken her servant and her lord --
Servant in love, and lord in marriage.
Then was he both in lordship and servitude.
Servitude? Nay, but in lordship above,
Since he has both his lady and his love;
His lady, certainly, and his wife also,
The which accords to the law of love.
And when he was in this happy state,
Home with his wife he goes to his country,
Not far from Pedmark, where his dwelling was,
Where he lives in bliss and in pleasure.
Who could tell, unless he had been wedded,
The joy, the ease, and the happiness
That is between a husband and his wife?
A year and more lasted this blissful life,
Until the knight of whom I thus speak,
That was called Arveragus of Kayrrud,
Prepared himself to go and dwell a year or two
In England, which was also called Britain,
To seek in arms good reputation and honor --
For he set all his desire in such labor --
And dwelled there two years; the book says thus.
Now will I stop (speaking) of this Arveragus,
And I will speak of Dorigen his wife,
Who loves her husband as her heart's life.
For his absence she weeps and sighs,
As do these noble wives when it pleases them.
She mourns, stays awake, wails, fasts, complains;
Desire of his presence so presses upon her
That all this wide world she reckoned as worth nothing.
Her friends, who knew her gloomy thought,
Comfort her in all that ever they can.
They preach to her, they tell her night and day
That she slays herself without cause, alas!
And every comfort possible in this case
They do to her with all their concern,
All to make her leave her sadness.
In the course of time, as every one of you knows,
One may so long engrave on a stone
Until some figure is imprinted upon it.
So long have they comforted her until she
Received has, by hope and by reason,
The imprint of their consolation,
Through which her great sorrow began to be relieved;
She can not always continue in such passionate grief.
And also Arveragus, in (the midst of) all this care, 
Has sent her letters home (telling) of his welfare,
And that he will come hastily again;
Or else this sorrow would have slain her heart.
Her friends saw her sorrow began to slacken
And prayed her on their knees, for God's sake,
To come and walk about in company,
Away to drive her dark imagining.
And finally she granted that request,
For well she saw that it was for the best.
Now her castle stood close by the sea,
And often with her friends she walks
To amuse herself upon the bank on high,
Where she saw many a ship and sailing vessel
Sailing their course, where it pleases them to go.
But then was that a portion of her woe,
For to herself full often, she says "Alas!",
"Is there no ship, of so many as I see,
Will bring home my lord? Then would my heart be
All cured of its bitter, sharp pains."
Another time there would she sit and think,
And cast her eyes downward from the brink.
But when she saw the grisly black rocks,
For sheer fear her heart would so quake
That on her feet she could not sustain herself.
Then would she sit down upon the green,
And piteously stare into the sea,
And say right thus, with sorrowful, cold sighs:
"Eternal God, who through thy foreknowledge
Leads the world by sure governance, 
Men say you make nothing in vain.
But, Lord, these grisly fiendish black rocks,
That seem rather a foul confusion
Of work than any fair creation
Of such a perfectly wise and stable God,
Why have you created this unreasonable work?
For by this work, south, north, nor west, nor east,
There is no benefit to man, nor bird, nor beast;
It does no good, to my understanding, but does harm.
See you not, Lord, how it destroys mankind?
A  hundred thousand bodies of mankind
Have rocks slain, although their names are forgotten,
And this mankind is so fair a part of thy work
That thou made it like to thine own image.
Then it seemed you had a great love
Toward mankind; but how then may it be
That you make such means to destroy it,
Which means do no good, but always cause trouble?
I know well clerks will say as they please,
By logical reasoning, that all is for the best,
Though I can not know the causes.
But that same God that made wind to blow
Keep my lord! This is my conclusion.
To clerks I leave all disputation.
But would God that all these black rocks 
Were sunk into hell for his sake!
These rocks slay my heart for fear."
Thus would she say, with many a piteous tear.
Her friends saw that it was no pleasure
To roam by the sea, but discomfort,
And decide to amuse themselves somewhere else.
They lead her by rivers and by springs,
And also in other delightful places;
They dance and they play at chess and backgammon.
So on a day, early in the morning-tide,
Unto a garden that was there nearby,
In which they had made their arrangement
For victuals and for other provisions,
They go and amuse themselves all the long day.
And this was on the sixth morning of May,
Which May had painted with its soft showers
This garden full of leaves and of flowers;
And craft of man's hand so skillfully
Had adorned this garden, truly,
That never was there garden of such worth
Unless it were the true paradise.
The odor of flowers and the fresh sight
Would have made any heart light
That ever was born, unless too great sickness
Or too great sorrow held it in distress,
It was so full of beauty with pleasure.
After dinner they go to dance,
And sing also, save Dorigen alone,
Who made always her complaint and her moan,
For she did not see him on the dance go
Who was her husband and her love also.
But nonetheless she must a time abide
And with good hope let her sorrow slip away.
In this dance, among other men,
Danced a squire before Dorigen,
Who was more lively and more gaily dressed,
As to my judgement, than is the month of May.
He sings, dances, passing any man
That is, or was, since the world began.
Therewith he was, if one should him describe,
One of the most handsome men alive;
Young, strong, very valiant, and rich, and wise,
And well beloved, and held in great esteem.
And shortly, if I shall tell the truth,
Unknown by this Dorigen at all,
This lusty squire, servant to Venus,
Who was called Aurelius,
Had loved her best of any creature
Two years and more, as was his fate,
But he never dared tell her his grievance.
Copiously he drank all his penance (suffered intensely).
He was in despair; he dared say nothing,
Except in his songs somewhat he would reveal
His woe, as in a general lament;
He said he loved and was in no way loved in return
Of such subject matter made he many lays,
Songs, complaints, roundels, virelays,
(Saying) how he dared not his sorrow tell,
But suffers as a fury does in hell;
And he must die, he said, as did Echo
For Narcissus, she who dared not tell her woe.
In other ways than you hear me say,
He dared not reveal to her his woe,
Except that, by chance, sometimes at dances,
Where young folk observe their customs (of courtship),
It may well be he looked on her face
In such a manner as a man that asks for grace;
But she knew nothing of his intent.
Nonetheless it happened, before they went away,
Because he was her neighbor,
And was a man of good reputation and honor,
And (she) had known him for a long time,
They fell in speech; and forth, more and more,
Unto his purpose drew Aurelius,
And when he saw his time, he said thus:
"Madame," he said, "by God that this world made,
Providing that I knew it might gladden your heart,
I wish that day that your Arveragus
Went over the sea, that I, Aurelius,
Had went from where I should never have come back.
For well I know my service is in vain;
My reward is but the breaking of my heart.
Madame, have pity upon my bitter pains;
For with one word you may me slay or save.
Here at your feet would God that I were buried!
I have now no opportunity to say more;
Have mercy, sweet, or you will make me die!"
She did look upon Aurelius;
"Is this your desire," said she, "and say you thus?
Never before," she said, "Did I know what you meant.
But now, Aurelius, I know your intention,
By that same God that gave me soul and life,
I shall never be an untrue wife
In word nor deed, so long as I have my wits;
I will be his to whom that I am knit.
Take this for my final answer."
But after that in play thus she said:
"Aurelius," she said, "by high God above,
Yet would I grant you to be your love,
Since I see you so piteously lament.
On whatever day that from end to end of Brittany
You remove all the rocks, stone by stone,
So that they do not prevent ship nor boat to go --
I say, when you have made the coast so clean
Of rocks that there is no stone seen,
Then will I love you best of any man;
Have here my pledged word, in all that is in my power."
"Is there no other grace in you?" he said.
"No, by that Lord," she said, "that made me!
For well I know that it shall never happen.
Let such follies pass out of your heart.
What pleasure should a man have in his life
To go love another man's wife,
Who has her body whenever he pleases?"
Aurelius very often bitterly sighs;
Woe was Aurelius when he heard this,
And with a sorrowful heart he thus answered:
"Madame," he said, "this would be an impossiblity!
Then I must die of sudden horrible death."
And with that word he turned away immediately.
Then came her other friends many a one,
And in the garden paths roamed up and down,
And knew nothing of this business,
But suddenly began to revel anew
Until the bright sun lost its hue;
For the horizon has bereft the sun of its light --
This is as much to say that it was night --
And home they go in joy and in pleasure,
Save only wretched Aurelius, alas!
He to his house is gone with sorrowful heart.
He sees he can not escape from his death;
He thought that he felt his heart grow cold.
Up to the heaven his hands he did hold,
And on his bare knees he set himself down,
And in his delirium said his prayer. 
For utter woe out of his wits he suddenly went.
He knew not what he spoke, but thus he said;
With piteous heart he has begun his complaint 
Unto the gods, and first unto the sun:
He said, "Apollo, god and governor
Of every plant, herb, tree, and flower,
That gives, according to thy height (in the sky),
To each of them its time and its season,
As thy astronomical position changes low or high,
Lord Phoebus, cast thy merciful eye
On wretched Aurelius, who is as good as lost.
Lo, lord! My lady has sworn my death 
Without guilt, unless thy kindness
Upon my dying heart have some pity.
For well I know, lord Phoebus, if you wish,
You can help me best (of anyone), except for my lady.
Now grant that I may tell you
How I may be helped and in what manner.
"Your blissful sister, Lucina the bright,
Who of the sea is chief goddess and queen
(Though Neptune have godly dominion in the sea,
Yet empress above him is she),
You know well, lord, that just as her desire
Is to be kindled and ignited by your fire, 
For which she follows you very attentively,
Just so the sea desires naturally
To follow her, as she that is goddess
Both in the sea and rivers great and small.
Wherefore, lord Phoebus, this is my request --
Do this miracle, or make my heart break --
That now at this next opposition (of the sun and moon)
Which shall be in the sign of the Lion,
Pray her so great a high tide to bring
That five fathoms at the least it rise above
The highest rock in Armorican Brittany;
And let this flood-tide endure for two years.
Then certainly to my lady may I say,
`Keep your promise, the rocks are away.'
"Lord Phoebus, do this miracle for me.
Pray her that she go at no faster speed as you;
I say, pray your sister that she go
At no faster speed as you for these two years.
Then shall she be fully even with you always,
And spring flood will last both night and day.
And unless she agree in such manner
To grant me my sovereign lady dear,
Pray her to sink every rock down
Into her own dark region
Under the ground, in which Pluto dwells,
Or never more shall I win my lady.
Thy temple in Delphi I will barefoot seek.
Lord Phoebus, see the tears on my cheek,
And on my pain have some compassion."
And with that word he fell down in a faint,
And for a long time he lay in a trance.
His brother, who knew of his suffering,
Caught him up and to bed he has him brought.
Despaired in this torment and this thought
I leave this woeful creature lying;
Let him choose, for all I care, whether he will live or die. 
Arveragus, with well-being and great honor,
As he that was of chivalry the flower,
Is come home, and other worthy men.
O blissful art thou now, thou Dorigen,
That hast thy lusty husband in thine arms,
The vigorous knight, the worthy man of arms,
That loves thee as his own heart's life.
He not at all desired to be suspicious,
If any person had spoken, while he was away,
To her of love; he had of it no fear.
He pays no attention to any such matter,
But dances, jousts, makes her good cheer;
And thus in joy and bliss I let them dwell,
And of the sick Aurelius I will tell.
In suffering and in hellish torment
Two years and more lay wretched Aurelius,
Before he could set a foot on the ground;
Nor had he any comfort in this time,
Except from his brother, who was a clerk.
He knew of all this woe and all this suffering,
For to no other creature, certainly,
He dared say any word of this matter.
Under his breast he bore it more secretly
Than ever did Pamphilus for Galathee.
His breast was unhurt, in outward appearance,
But in his heart ever was the sharp arrow.
And well you know that for a wound healed only on the surface
In surgery the treatment is perilous,
Unless one could touch the arrow or grasp it.
His brother wept and wailed secretly,
Until at the last he remembered,
That while he was at Orleans in France --
As young clerks that are eager
To read arts that are arcane
Seek in every nook and every cranny
To learn specialized branches of learning --
He remembered that, one day,
At Orleans in a study hall he saw a book
Of natural science, which his fellow,
Who was at that time a bachelor of law,
Although he was there to learn another craft,
Had covertly left upon his desk;
Which book spoke much of the operations
Concerning the eight and twenty stations
That belong to the moon, and such folly
As in our days is not worth a fly --
For holy church's faith in our belief
Does not allow any illusion to grieve us.
And when this book was in his remembrance,
Straightway for joy his heart began to dance,
And to himself he said secretly,
"My brother shall be cured speedily;
For I am sure that there are sciences
By which men make diverse illusions,
Such as these subtle illusionists play.
For often at feasts have I well heard say
That illusionists within a large hall 
Have made come in a water and a barge,
And in the hall row up and down.
Sometimes a grim lion has seemed to come;
And sometimes flowers spring as in a field;
Sometimes a vine, and grapes white and red;
Sometimes a castle, all of mortar and stone;
And when they pleased, they made it suddenly disappear.
Thus it seemed to every man's sight.
"Now then conclude I thus: that if I might
At Orleans find some old fellow
Who had these moon's stations in mind,
Or other natural science beyond that
He should well make my brother have his love.
For with an apparition a clerk may make it seem,
To man's sight, that all the rocks black
Of Brittany were removed every one,
And ships by the shore come and go,
And in such form endure a week or two.
Then my brother would be cured of his woe;
Then must she by necessity keep her promise,
Or else he shall shame her at the least."
Why should I make a longer tale of this?
Unto his brother's bed he is come,
And such encouragement he gave him to go
To Orleans that he leaped up immediately,
And on his way forth then is he gone
In hope to be relieved of his care.
When they had come almost to that city,
Not more than two or three furlongs,
A young clerk roaming by himself they met,
Who in Latin politely greeted them,
And after that he said a wonderful thing:
"I know," he said, "the cause of your coming."
And before they went any foot farther,
He told them all that was in their intention.
This Breton clerk asked him about fellows
Whom he had known in old days,
And he answered him that they were dead,
For which he wept very often many a tear.
Down off his horse Aurelius alighted straightway,
And with this magician forth he is gone
Home to his house, and put them well at ease.
They lacked no foods that might please them.
So well appointed a house as this one was 
Aurelius in his life saw never a one.
He showed him, before he went to supper,
Forests, parks full of wild deer;
There he saw harts with their high horns,
The greatest that ever were seen with eye.
He saw a hundred of them slain by hounds,
And some bled because of bitter wounds from arrows.
He saw, when these wild deer were removed,
These hunters with falcons upon a fair riverbank,
That with their hawks have slain the heron.
Then he saw knights jousting in a plain;
And after this he provided him such pleasure
That he showed him his lady in a dance,
In which he himself danced, as he thought.
And when this master that wrought this magic 
Saw it was time, he clapped his two hands,
And farewell! All our revel was gone.
And yet moved they never out of the house,
While they saw all this marvelous sight,
But in his study, where his books are,
They sat still, and no person (was there) but these three.
This master called his squire to him,
And said to him thus: "Is our supper ready?
Almost an hour it is, I declare,
Since I ordered you to make our supper,
When these worthy men went with me
Into my study, where my books are."
"Sir," said this squire, "when it pleases you,
It is all ready, even if you want it right now."
"Go we then to sup," said he, "as is the best (to do).
These amorous folk sometime must have their rest."
At after-supper they began to discuss
What sum this master's payment should be
To remove all the rocks of Brittany,
And also from Gironde to the mouth of Seine.
He raised difficulties, and swore, as God may him save,
Less than a thousand pounds he would not have,
Nor would he go gladly even for that sum. 
Aurelius, with blissful heart, at once
Answered thus: "Fie on a thousand pounds!
This wide world, which men say is round,
I would give it, if I were lord of it.
This bargain is fully concluded, for we are agreed.
You shall be paid truly, by my pledged word!
But look now, for no negligence or laziness
You delay us here any longer than to-morrow."
"Nay," said this clerk, "have here my faith as a pledge."
To bed is gone Aurelius when it pleased him,
And well nigh all that night he had his rest.
What for his labor and his hope of bliss,
His woeful heart of suffering had relief.
Upon the morrow, when it was day,
To Brittany took they the direct route,
Aurelius and this magician beside him,
And are arrived where they would stay.
And this was, as these books remind me,
The cold, frosty season of December.
Phoebus grew old, and colored grayish silver,
That in his hot declination (in summer)
Shone like burnished gold with bright rays;
But now in Capricorn he alights down,
Where he shone full pale, I dare well say.
The bitter frosts, with the sleet and rain,
Have destroyed the green in every garden.
Janus sits by the fire, with double beard,
And drinks the wine from his buffalo horn;
Before him stands meat of the tusked boar,
And "Noel" cries every lusty man.
Aurelius in all that ever he can
Provides for this master entertainment and reverence,
And prays him to work diligently
To bring him out of his bitter pains,
Or with a sword he would slit his heart.
This subtle clerk had such pity for this man
That night and day he worked as fast as he can
To seek a time for his astronomical operation; 
This is to say, to make illusion,
By such an appearance or conjurer's trick --
I know no technical terms of astrology --
That she and every person should believe and say
That the rocks of Brittany were away,
Or else they were sunk under ground.
So at the last he has his time found
To make his tricks and his wretched deeds
Of such a superstitious cursedness.
His astronomical tables of Toledo he brought forth,
Accurately corrected, nor was there anything lacking,
Neither his tables of single years nor of twenty-year periods,
Nor his dates for calculations, nor his other apparatus,
Such as are his table of distances and his angles for calculation
And his table for computing motions (of the planets)
For his divisions of the sphere in every detail. 
And by his eighth sphere in his working
He knew full well how far the star Alnath was shoved
From the head of that fixed Aries above,
That in the ninth sphere is observed;
Full subtly he calculated all this.
When he had found his first position of the moon,
He knew the remnant by astronomical tables,
And knew the arising of his moon well,
And in which planet's face and term (zodiacal divisions), and everything;
And knew full well the moon's position
In accordance with his operation,
And knew also his other observations
For such illusions and such evil practices
As heathen folk used in those days.
For which no longer he made delay,
But through his magic, for a week or two,
It seemed that all the rocks were away.
Aurelius, who is yet in despair 
Whether he shall have his love or fare badly,
Waits night and day for this miracle;
And when he knew that there was no obstacle,
That every one of these rocks were removed,
Down to his mistress' feet he fell at once,
And said, "I woeful wretched, Aurelius,
Thank you, lord, and my lady Venus,
Who have helped me out of my deadly cares."
And to the temple he has held forth his way,
Where he knew he should see his lady.
And when he saw his time, immediately he,
With fearful heart and with full humble manner,
Has saluted his sovereign lady dear:
"My true lady," said this woeful man,
"Whom I most dread and love as I best know how,
And am of all this world most reluctant to displease,
Were it not that I for you have such distress
That I must die here at your feet right now,
I would tell nothing of how I am beset by woe. 
But certainly either I must die or complain;
You slay me guiltless for sheer pain.
But though you have no pity on my death,
Think carefully before you break your pledged word.
Repent, for that God above,
Before you slay me because I love you.
For, madam, you know well what you have promised --
Not that I claim any thing as a right
From you, my sovereign lady, except for your good favor --
But in a garden yonder, at a particular place,
You know right well what you promised me;
And in my hand you pledged your word
To love me best -- God knows, you said so,
Although I am unworthy of it.
Madam, I speak it for your honor
More than to save my heart's life right now --
I have done as you commanded me;
And if you agree, you may go see.
Do as you please; have your promise in mind,
For, living or dead, right there you shall find me.
In you lies the power to make me live or die --
But well I know the rocks are away."
He takes his leave, and she astounded stood;
In all her face was not a drop of blood.
She never expected to have come in such a trap.
"Alas," she said, "that ever this should happen!
For I never supposed by possibility
That such a wonder or marvel could be!
It is against the laws of nature."
And home she goes a sorrowful creature;
For sheer fear she can hardly walk.
She weeps, wails, all one day or two,
And swoons, that it was pitiful to see.
But why it was she told to no person,
For Arveragus had gone out of town.
But to herself she spoke, and said thus,
With face pale and with full sorrowful manner,
In her complaint, as you shall after hear:
"Alas," said she, "on thee, Fortune, I complain,
That without warning hast wrapped me in thy chain,
From which to escape I know no help, 
Save only death or else dishonor;
One of these two I am compelled to choose.
But neverthelees, yet I would rather lose
My life than of my body to have a shame,
Or know myself false, or lose my good name;
And with my death I may be free from blame, indeed.
Has there not many a noble wife before this,
And many a maid, slain herself, alas,
Rather than do sin with her body?
"Yes indeed, certainly, lo, these stories bear witness:
When thirty tyrants, full of cursedness,
Had slain Phidon in Athens at the feast,
They commanded (the guards) to seize his daughters 
And bring them before them as an insult,
All naked, to fulfill their foul delight,
And in their father's blood they made them dance
Upon the pavement, God give them misfortune!
For which these woeful maidens, full of dread,
Rather than they would lose their maidenhood,
They secretly have leaped into a well
And drowned themselves, as the books tell.
"They of Messene had (people) search out and seek
Fifty maidens of Sparta also,
On whom they would do their lechery.
But there was none of all that company
That she was not slain, and with a good intent
Chose rather to die than assent
To be deprived of her maidenhood.
Why should I then be afraid to die?
Lo, also, the tyrant Aristoclides,
That loved a maiden, called Stymphalides,
When her father was slain on a night,
Unto Diana's temple she goes directly,
And seized the statue in her two hands,
From which statue she would never go.
No person could pull her hands away from it 
Until she was slain, right in the same place.
"Now since maidens had such disdain
To be defiled by man's foul delight,
Well ought a wife rather herself slay
Than be defiled, as it seems to me.
What shall I say of Hasdrubale's wife,
That at Carthage deprived herself of her life?
For when she saw that Romans won the town,
She took her children all, and leaped down
Into the fire, and chose rather to die
Than any Roman did her a dishonor.
Has not Lucretia slain herself, alas,
At Rome, when she was raped
By Tarquin, for she thought it was a shame
To live when she had lost her good name?
The seven maidens of Miletus also
Have slain themselves, for sheer dread and woe,
Rather than folk of Galatia should rape them.
More than a thousand stories, as I guess,
Could I now tell concerning this matter.
When Habradate was slain, his wife so dear
Herself slew, and let her blood pour
In Habradate's wounds deep and wide,
And said, `My body, at the least,
There shall no person defile, if I can (help it)."
"Why should I tell more examples concerning this,
Since so many have themselves slain
Well rather than they would be defiled?
I will conclude that it is better for me
To slay myself than be defiled thus.
I will be true unto Arveragus,
Or rather slay myself in some manner,
As did Demotion's daughter dear
Because she would not defiled be.
O Scedasus, it is a very great pity
To read how thy daughters died, alas,
Who slew themselves for a similar sort of cause.
As great a pity was it, or well more,
The Theban maiden that for Nichanore
Slew herself, exactly for such sort of woe.
Another Theban maiden did exactly the same;
Because one of Macedonia had raped her,
She with her death avenged her maidenhood.
What shall I say of Nicerates' wife,
That for a similar case deprived herself of her life?
How true also to Alcebiades was
His lover, who chose rather to die 
Than to allow his body to be unburied.
Lo, what a wife was Alcestis," she said.
"What says Homer of good Penelope?
All Greece knows of her chastity.
By God, of Laodomia is written thus,
That when at Troy Protheselaus was slain,
No longer would she live after his day (i.e., death).
The same of noble Portia I can tell;
Without Brutus she could not live,
To whom she had entirely given her heart.
The perfect wifehood of Arthemesie
Honored is through all heathendom.
O Teuta, queen, thy wifely chastity
To all wives may be a mirror.
The same thing I say of Bilia,
Of Rhodogune, and also Valeria."
Thus Dorigen complained a day or two,
Intending ever that she would die.
But neverthelees, upon the third night,
Home came Arveragus, this worthy knight,
And asked her why she wept so bitterly;
And she began to weep, ever the longer (she wept) the more (she wept) . 
"Alas," said she, "that ever I was born!
Thus have I said," said she, "thus have I sworn" --
And told him all as you have heard before;
There is no need to repeat it to you any more.
This husband, with cheerful demeanor, in a friendly manner
Answered and said as I shall tell you:
"Is there anything else, Dorigen, but this?"
"Nay, nay," she said, "So help me God!
This is too much, even if it were God's will."
"Yes, wife," he said, "let sleep that which is still.
It may be well, perhaps, yet to day.
You shall keep your pledged word, by my faith!
For as surely as God may have mercy upon me,
I had well rather be stabbed 
For sheer love which I to have for you,
Than you should (do anything but) keep and save your pledged word.
One's pldged word is the highest thing that one may keep" --
But with that word he immediately burst into tears,
And said, "I you forbid, upon pain of death,
That never, while thy life or breath lasts,
Thou tell any person about this adventure --
As I best can, I will my woe endure --
Nor make any outward appearance of sadness,
That folk may believe or guess anything harmful concerning you."
And forth he called a squire and a maid:
"Go forth right now with Dorigen," he said,
"And bring her to such a place quickly."
They take their leave, and on their way they go,
But they knew not why she thither went.
He would no person tell his intention.
Perhaps a heap of you, indeed,
Will consider him a foolish man in this
That he will put his wife in jeopardy.
Listen to the tale before you cry out about her.
She may have better fortune than it seems to you;
And when you have heard the tale, judge.
This squire, who was called Aurelius,
On Dorigen who was so amorous,
By chance happened to meet her 
Amidst the town, right in the busiest street,
As she was about to go the way directly
Toward the garden where she had promised (to go).
And he was going toward the garden also;
For well he spied when she would go
Out of her house to any sort of place.
But thus they met, by chance or luck,
And he salutes her cheerfully,
And asked her where she went;
And she answered, as if she were half mad,
"Unto the garden, as my husband commanded,
My pledged word to keep -- alas, alas!"
Aurelius began to wonder about this case,
And in his heart had great compassion
Of her and of her lamentation,
And of Arveragus, the worthy knight,
Who commanded her to keep all that she had promised,
So hateful to him it was that his wife should break her word;
And in his heart he took great pity on this,
Considering what would be best in every respect,
That he would rather yet refrain from his desire
Than do so great a churlish despicable act
Against generosity and all nobility of character;
For which in few words he said thus:
"Madam, say to your lord Arveragus
That since I see his great graciousness
To you, and also I see well your distress,
That he would rather have shame (and that would be a pity)
Than you should thus break your pledged word to me,
I would well rather suffer woe always
Than I should break apart the love between you two.
I release you, madam, into your hand I return
Freely every pledge and every bond
That you have made to me before now,
Since that time when you were born.
I pledge my word, I shall never reprove you 
For any promise, and here I take my leave,
Of the truest and the best wife
That ever yet I knew in all my life.
But let every wife beware of her promise!
Remember Dorigen, at the least.
Thus can a squire do a gentle deed
As well as can a knight, without doubt."
She thanks him upon her bare knees,
And home unto her husband she is gone,
And told him all, as you have heard me say;
And be you sure, he was so well pleased
That it would be impossible for me to write.
Why should I write longer about this matter?
Arveragus and Dorigen his wife
In perfect bliss lead forth their life.
Never again was there any anger between them.
He cherishes her as though she were a queen,
And she was to him true for evermore.
Of these two folk you get of me no more.
Aurelius, that all his expenditure has forfeited,
Curses the time that ever he was born:
"Alas!" said he. "Alas, that I promised
Of refined gold a thousand pounds of weight
Unto this scientist! What shall I do?
I see no more but that I am ruined.
My heritage I must of necessity sell,
And be a beggar; here I may not remain
And shame all my kin in this place,
Unless I can get a better grace (favor) from him.
But nonetheless, I will try him, (offering)
At specific days, year by year, to pay,
And thank him for his great courtesy.
My word I will keep, I will not lie."
With a sore heart he goes unto his money box,
And brought gold unto this scientist,
The value of five hundred pounds, I guess,
And him beseeches, of his nobleness,
To grant him days (on which to pay) the remnant;
And said, "Master, I dare well make boast,
I failed never of my pledged word as yet.
For surely my debt shall be repaid
To you, even though I have
To go a-begging in my bare tunic.
But if you would agree, upon my promise,
To grant me a respite for two years or three,
Then I would be well; for otherwise I must sell
My heritage; there is no more to tell."
This scientist soberly answered,
And said thus, when he heard these words:
"Have I not kept my agreement with thee?"
"Yes, certainly, well and truly," said he.
"Hast thou not had thy lady as it pleases thee?"
"No, no," said he, and sorrowfully he sighs.
"What was the cause? Tel me if thou know how."
Aurelius his tale immediately began,
And told him all, as you have heard before;
There is no need to repeat it to you again.
He said, "Arveragus, of his nobility,
Had rather die in sorrow and in distress
Than that his wife would be false of her pledged word."
The sorrow of Dorigen he told him also;
How loathfull to her it was to be a wicked wife,
And that she would rather have lost her life that day,
And that her word she swore through ignorance,
She never before had heard tell of illusion.
"That made me have for her such great pity;
And right as freely as he sent her to me,
As freely I sent her to him again.
This is the entire matter; there is no more to say."
This scientist answered, "Dear brother,
Every one of you did nobly to the other.
Thou art a squire, and he is a knight;
But God forbid, for his blissful might,
That a clerk could not do a gentle deed 
As well as any of you, it is no doubt!
Sir, I release thee from thy (debt of a) thousand pounds,
As if thou right now were crept out of the ground,
Nor never before now had known me.
For, sir, I will not take a penny from thee
For all my craft, nor anything for my labor.
Thou hast paid well for my living expenses.
It is enough, and farewell, have good day!"
And took his horse, and forth he goes his way.
Gentlemen, this question, then, will I ask now,
Which was the most free, as it seems to you?
Now tell me, before you farther go.
I know no more; my tale is at an end.
ALIGN=top></A></LEFT> Texts on this page prepared and maintained by L. D. Benson <A HREF="mailto:ldb@wjh.harvard.edu">(ldb@wjh.harvard.edu)</A> 
