Once, as old histories tell us,
There was a duke who was called Theseus;
He was lord and governor of Athens,
And in his time such a conqueror
That there was no one greater under the sun.
Very many a powerful country had he won;
What with his wisdom and his chivalry,
He conquered all the land of the Amazons,
That once was called Scithia,
And wedded the queen Ypolita,
And brought her home with him into his country
With much glory and great ceremony,
And also her young sister Emelye.
And thus with victory and with festivity
I leave this noble duke riding to Athens,
And all his host in arms beside him.
And certainly, if it were not too long to hear,
I would have told you fully the manner
How the reign of Femenye was won
By Theseus and by his chivalry;
And of the great battle at that time
Between Athenians and Amazons;
And how Ypolita was besieged,
The fair, bold queen of Scithia;
And of the festivity that was at their wedding,
And of the storm at her home-coming;
But all that matter I must now forgo. 
I have, God knows, a large field to till,
And the oxen in my plow are weak.
The remnant of the tale is long enough.
Also I will not hinder any one of this company;
Let every fellow tell his tale in turn,
And let's see now who shall win the supper;
And where I left off, I will again begin.
This duke, of whom I make mention,
When he was come almost unto the town,
In all his prosperity and in his most pride,
He was aware, as he cast his eye aside,
Where there kneeled in the high way
A company of ladies, two by two,
Each after another, clad in black clothes;
But such a cry and such a woeful (lament) they make
That in this world is no living creature 
That (ever) heard lamentation such as this;
And of this cry they would not ever stop
Until they seized the reins of his bridle.
"What folk are you, who at my homecoming
So disturb my festival with crying?"
Said Theseus. "Have you such great envy
Of my honor, (you) who thus lament and cry?
Or who has injured or offended you?
And tell me if it may be remedied,
And why you are clothed thus in black."
The eldest lady of them all spoke,
After she had swooned with (so) deadly a countenance,
That it was pitiful to see and hear;
She said, "Lord, to whom Fortune has given
Victory, and (allowed) to live as a conqueror,
Your glory and your honor does not grieve us,
But we beseech (you for) mercy and succor.
Have mercy on our woe and our distress!
Some drop of pity, because of thy nobility,
Let thou fall upon us wretched women,
For, certainly, lord, there is not one of us all
Who has not been a duchesse or a queen.
Now we are miserable wretches, as it is easily seen,
Thanks be to Fortune and her false wheel,
Who assures no estate (will continue) to be well.
And certainly, lord, to await your presence,
Here in this temple of the goddess Clemency
We have been waiting all this fortnight.
Now help us, lord, since it is in thy power.
"I, wretch, who weep and wail thus,
Was once wife to king Cappaneus,
Who died at Thebes -- cursed be that day! --
And all of us who are in this condition
And make all this lamentation,
We lost all our husbands at that town,
While the siege lay around it.
And yet now the old Creon -- woe oh woe! --
Who is now lord of the city of Thebes,
Filled with anger and with iniquity,
He, for spite and for his tyranny,
To do dishonor to the dead bodies
Of all our lords who are slain,
Has dragged all the bodies in a heap,
And will not allow them, not at all, 
Neither to be buried nor burned,
But makes hounds eat them as an insult."
And with that word, without more delay,
They fell face down and cried piteously,
"Have some mercy on us wretched women,
And let our sorrow sink in thy heart."
This gentle duke leaped down from his war horse
With compassionate heart, when he heard them speak.
It seemed to him that his heart would break,
When he saw them so pitiful and so dejected,
That once were of such high rank;
And in his arms he caught up them all,
And comforts them with very good will,
And swore his oath, as he was true knight,
(That) he would do his might so completely
To avenge them upon the tyrant Creon 
That all the people of Greece should speak (about)
How Creon was treated by Theseus
As one who had very well deserved his death.
And right away, without more delay,
He displays his banner, and rode forth 
Toward Thebes, and all his army beside (him).
He would not walk nor ride any nearer to Athens,
Nor take his ease fully half a day,
But that night he lay (camped) on his way,
And sent straightway Ypolita the queen,
And Emelye, her beautiful young sister,
Unto the town of Athens to dwell,
And forth he rides; there is no more to tell.
The red statue of Mars, with spear and shield,
So shines in his large white banner
That all the fields glitter all around;
And by his banner is carried his pennon
Of very rich gold, in which there was embroidered
The Minotaur, which he defeated in Crete.
Thus rides this duke, thus rides this conqueror,
And in his army the flower of chivalry,
Until he came to Thebes and dismounted
Graciously in a field, where he intended to fight.
But briefly to speak of this thing,
With Creon, who was king of Thebes,
He fought, and slew him boldly as a knight
In open battle, and put the army to flight;
And by assault he won the city afterwards,
And tore down both wall and beam and rafter;
And he gave back to the ladies 
The bones of their husbands who were slain,
To do obsequies, as was then the custom.
But it would be all too long to describe 
The great clamor and the lamentation
That the ladies made at the burning
Of the bodies, and the great honor
That Theseus, the noble conqueror,
Does to the ladies, when they went from him;
But briefly to tell is my intent.
When this worthy duke, this Theseus,
Has slain Creon and thus won Thebes,
Still in that field he took all night his rest,
And did with all the country as he pleased.
To search in the heap of dead bodies,
To strip them of armor and of clothing,
The scavengers took great pains and worked hard
After the battle and defeat.
And (it) so befell that in the heap they found,
Pierced through with many a grievous bloody wound,
Two young knights lying side by side,
Both with the same coat of arms, very richly wrought,
Of which two one was called Arcite,
And that other knight was called Palamon.
They were not fully alive, nor fully dead,
But by their coats of arms and by their equipment
The heralds best knew them in particular
As they that were of the royal blood 
Of Thebes, and born of two sisters.
The scavengers have pulled them out of the heap,
And have carried them softy unto the tent
Of Theseus; and he very soon sent them 
To Athens, to dwell in prison
Perpetually -- he would not (accept) any ransom.
And when this worthy duke has thus done,
He took his army, and home he rides straightway
As a conqueror crowned with laurel;
And there he lives in joy and in honor
For the duration of his life; what more words are needed?
And in a tower, in anguish and in woe,
This Palamon and his fellow Arcite
For evermore (remain); no gold can ransom them.
This passes year by year and day by day,
Until it befell once, in a morning of May,
That Emelye, who was fairer to be seen 
Than is the lily upon its green stalk,
And fresher than the May with new flowers --
For her hue vied with color of the rose,
I do not know which was the finer of them two --
Before it was day, as was her custom to do,
She was arisen and all ready prepared,
For May will have no laziness at night.
The season urges on every gentle heart,
And makes it out of its sleep to awake suddenly,
And says "Arise, and do thy observance."
This made Emelye remember
To do honor to May, and to rise.
She was gaily clothed, so to say:
Her yellow hair was braided in a tress
Behind her back, a yard long, I guess.
And in the garden, at the rising of the sun,
She walks up and down, and as she pleases
She gathers flowers, mixed white and red,
To make an intricate garland for her head;
And she sang (as) heavenly as an angel.
The great tower, that was so thick and strong,
Which was the main fortification of the castle
(Where the knights were in prison
Of which I told yow and shall tell),
Was just next to the garden wall
Where this Emelye took her pleasure.
The sun was bright and clear that morning,
And Palamon, this woeful prisoner,
As was his custom, by permission of his jailer,
Had risen and roamed in a chamber on high,
In which he saw all the noble city,
And also the garden, full of green branches,
Where this fresh Emelye the bright
Was in her walk, and roamed up and down.
This sorrowful prisoner, this Palamon,
Goes in the chamber roaming to and fro
And to himself lamenting his woe.
That he was born, full often he said, "alas!"
And so it happened, by chance or accident,
That through a window, thickly set with many a bar
Of iron, great and square as any beam,
He cast his eye upon Emelye,
And with that he turned pale and cried, "A!"
As though he were stabbed unto the heart.
And with that cry Arcite immediately leaped up 
And said, "My cousin, what ails thee,
Who art so pale and deadly to look upon?
Why didst thou cry out? Who has done thee offence?
For the love of God, take all in patience
Our imprisonment, for it may not be otherwise.
Fortune has given us this adversity.
Some wicked aspect or disposition
Of Saturn, by some arrangement of the heavenly bodies,
Has given us this, although we had sworn it would not be;
So stood the heavens when we were born.
We must endure it; this is the short and plain."
This Palamon answered and said in reply,
"Cousin, truly, concerning this opinion
Thou hast a foolish conception.
This prison did not cause me to cry out,
But I was hurt right now through my eye
Into my heart, so that it will be the death of me.
The fairness of that lady whom I see
Yonder in the garden roaming to and fro
Is cause of all my crying and my woe.
I know not whether she is woman or goddess,
But truly it is Venus, as I suppose."
And with that he fell down on his knees,
And said, "Venus, if it be thy will
Thus to transfigure yourself in this garden 
Before me, sorrowful, wretched creature,
Help that we may escape out of this prison.
And if it be so that my destiny is shaped
By eternal decree to die in prison,
Have some compassion on our (noble) lineage
Which is brought so low by tyranny."
And with that word Arcite did see
Where this lady roamed to and fro,
And with that sight her beauty hurt him so,
That, if Palamon was sorely wounded,
Arcite is hurt as much as he, or more.
And with a sigh he said piteously,
"The fresh beauty slays me suddenly
Of her who roams in the yonder place;
And unless I have her mercy and her grace,
So that I can at least see her, 
I am as good as dead; there is no more to say."
This Palamon, when he heard those words,
Angrily he looked and answered,
"Sayest thou this in earnest or in play?"
"Nay," said Arcite, "in earnest, by my faith!
So help me God, I have no desire to play."
This Palamon did knit his two brows.
"It would not be," said he, "any great honor to thee 
To be false, nor to be traitor
To me, who am thy cousin and thy brother
Sworn very sincerely, and each of us to the other,
That never, though we had to die by torture,
Until death shall part us two,
Neither of us in love (is) to hinder the other,
Nor in any other case, my dear brother,
But rather thou shouldest truly help me
In every case, as I shall help thee --
This was thy oath, and mine also, certainly;
I know right well, thou darest not deny it.
Thus thou art my trusted confidant, without doubt,
And now thou wouldest falsely be busy preparing 
To love my lady, whom I love and serve,
And ever shall until my heart dies.
Nay, certainly, false Arcite, thou shalt not (do) so.
I loved hire first, and told thee my woe
As to my confidant and my sworn brother 
To further me, as I have told before.
For which thou art bound as a knight
To help me, if it lay in thy power,
Or else thou art false, I dare well say."
This Arcite full proudly spoke in return:
"Thou shalt," said he, "be rather false than I;
And thou art false, I tell thee flatly,
As a mistress I loved her first before thou.
What wilt thou say? Thou knowest not yet now
Whether she is a woman or goddess!
Thine is a feeling of holiness,
And mine is love as to a creature;
For which I told thee my circumstance
As to my cousin and my sworn brother.
I posit (this assumption): that thou lovedest her first;
Knowest thou not well the old clerks' saying,
That `who shall give a lover any law?'
Love is a greater law, by my skull,
Than may be given to any earthly man;
And therefore positive (man-made) law and such decree
Is broken every day for love in every way.
A man must of necessity love, in spite of all he can do;
He can not flee (from) it, though he should be dead,
Whether she be maid, or widow, or else wife.
And also it is not likely all thy life
To stand in her good graces; no more shall I;
For well thou thyself knowest, truly,
That thou and I are condemned to prison
Perpetually; no ransom can help us.
We strive as the hounds did for the bone;
They fought all day, and yet their share was nothing.
There came a kite, while they were so angry,
And carried away the bone between them both.
And therefore, at the king's court, my brother,
Each man for himself, there is no other (way).
Love, if it please thee, for I love and always shall;
And truly, dear brother, this is all.
Here in this prison we must endure,
And each one of us take his chance."
Great and long was the strife between them two,
If I had leisure to tell (it);
But to the point. It happened on a day,
To tell it to you as briefly as I can,
A worthy duke that was called  Perotheus,
Who was  a friend to duke Theseus
Since that same time that they were little children,
Had come to Athens to visit his friend,
And to amuse himself as he was accustomed to do;
For in this world he loved no man so (much),
And he (Theseus) loved him as tenderly in turn.
So well they loved, as old books say,
That when one was dead, truly to tell,
His friend went and sought him down in hell --
But of that story I do not desire to write.
Duke Perotheus loved well Arcite,
And had known him at Thebes year after year,
And finally at request and prayer
Of Perotheus, without any ransom,
Duke Theseus let him out of prison
Freely to go all over, wherever he wishes,
In such a manner as shall I tell you.
This was the agreement, plainly to write,
Between Theseus and this Arcite:
That if it so were that Arcite were found
Ever in his life, by day or night, at any moment
In any country of this Theseus,
And if he were caught, it was agreed thus,
That with a sword he should lose his head.
There was no other remedy nor course of action;
But (he) takes his leave, and homeward he sped.
Let him be ware! His neck lies as a pledge.
How great a sorrow now suffers Arcite!
He feels the death smite through his heart;
He weeps, wails, cries piteously;
To slay himself he secretly awaits (an opportunity).
He said, "Alas that day that I was born!
Now my prison is worse than before;
Now I am destined eternally to dwell
Not in purgatory, but in hell.
Alas, that ever I knew Perotheus!
For else I would have remained with Theseus,
Fettered in his prison evermore.
Then would I have been in bliss and not in woe.
Only the sight of her whom I serve,
Though I never can deserve her grace,
Would have sufficed right enough for me.
O dear cousin Palamon," said he,
"The victory of this adventure is thine.
Very blissfully in prison thou can remain --
In prison? Certainly not, but in paradise!
Well has Fortune turned the dice for thee,
That hast the sight of her, and I the absence.
For it is possible, since thou hast her presence,
And art a knight, a worthy and an able (one),
That by some chance, since Fortune is changeable,
Thou mayest sometime attain thy desire.
But I, who am exiled and barren
Of all grace, and in so great despair
That there is not earth, water, fire, nor air,
Nor creature that is made of them,
That can help me or do comfort (to me) in this,
Well ought I to die in despair and distress.
Farwell my life, my desire, and my gladness!
"Alas, why do folk so commonly complain 
About the providence of God, or of Fortune,
That gives them full often in many a manner
Much better than they can themselves imagine?
One man desires to have riches,
Which is the cause of his murder or great sickness;
And one man would happily (go) out of his prison,
Who is slain in his house by members of his household.
Infinite harms are in this matter.
We know not what thing we pray for here;
We act like one who is drunk as a mouse.
A drunk man knows well he has a house,
But he does not know which is the right way to it,
And to a drunk man the way is slippery.
And certainly, so we fare in this world;
We seek eagerly after felicity,
But we go wrong very often, truly.
Thus can we all say, and especially I,
Who supposed and had a firm belief
That if I might escape from prison,
Then I would have been in joy and perfect well-being,
Whereas now I am exiled from my source of happiness.
Since I can not see you, Emelye,
I am as good as dead; there is not any remedy."
Upon that other side Palamon,
When he knew Arcite was gone,
He makes such sorrow that the great tour
Resounds with his yowling and clamor.
The great fetters themselves on his shins 
Were wet from his bitter, salt tears.
"Alas," said he, "Arcite, cousin mine,
Of all our strife, God knows, the profit is thine.
Thou walkest freely now in Thebes,
And thou care little about my woe.
Thou mayest, since thou hast wisdom and manhood,
Assemble all the folk of our family,
And make a war so sharp on this city
That by some chance or some treaty
Thou mayest have her as lady and as wife
For whom I must of necessity lose my life.
For, as by way of possibility,
Since thou art at thy liberty, free of prison,
And art a lord, thy advantage is great,
More than is mine, who die here in a cage.
For I must weep and wail, while I live,
With all the woe that prison may give me,
And also with pain that love gives me also,
That doubles all my torment and my woe."
With that the fire of jealousy started up
Within his breast, and seized him by the heart
So madly that he was to look upon like 
The box tree or the ash dead and cold.
Then said he, "O cruel gods that govern
This world with binding of your eternal word,
And write in the table of adamant (hardest of stones)
Your decision and your eternal decree,
Why is mankind more obligated unto you 
Than is the sheep that cowers in the sheepfold?
For man is slain exactly like another beast,
And dwells also in prison and detention,
And has sickness and great adversity,
And often times guiltless, indeed.
"What (sort of) governance is in this foreknowledge,
That torments guiltless innocence?
And yet this increases all my suffering,
That man is bound to his duty,
For God's sake, to refrain from his desire,
Whereas a beast may fulfill all his desire.
And when a beast is dead he has no pain;   
But man after his death must weep and lament,
Though in this world he may have (had) care and woe.
Without doubt such is the case.
The answer to this I leave to theologians,
But well I know that great pain is in this world.
Alas, I see a serpent or a thief,
That has done mischief to many a true man,
Go at his liberty, and can go where he pleases.
But I must be in prison because of Saturn,
And also because of Juno, jealous and also mad,
Who has destroyed well nigh all the blood
Of Thebes with its wide devastated walls;
And Venus slays me on that other side
For jealousy and fear of this Arcite."
Now will I cease (speaking of) of Palamon for a little while,
And leave him to dwell in his prison still,
And of Arcite forth I will tell you.
The summer passes, and the long nights 
Increase doubly the strong pains 
Both of the lover and the prisoner.
I know not which has the more woeful task.
For, briefly to say (it), this Palamon
Is damned perpetually to prison,
In chains and in fetters to be dead;
And Arcite is exiled on threat of losing his head
For evermore, out of that country,
Nor nevermore shall see his lady.
Yow lovers now I ask this question:
Who has the worse, Arcite or Palamon?
That one may see his lady every day,
But in prison he must always dwell;
That other where he pleases may ride or walk,
But he shall see his lady nevermore.
Now judge as it pleases you, you who know (of such things),
For I will tell forth as I began.
ALIGN=top></A></LEFT> Texts on this page prepared and maintained by L. D. Benson <A HREF="mailto:ldb@wjh.harvard.edu">(ldb@wjh.harvard.edu)</A> 
