Great was the feast in Athens that day,
And also the pleasing season of that May
Made every person to be in such delight
That all that Monday they joust and dance,
And spend that day in Venus's noble service.
But because they must rise
Early, to see the great fight,
Unto their rest they went at nightfall.
And in the morning, when day did spring,
Noise and clattering of horses and armor 
There was in hostelries all about,
And to the palace there rode many a company
Of lords upon steeds and palfreys.
There canst thou see preparation of armor
So exotic and so rich, and wrought so well
Of goldsmiths' works, of embroidery, and of steel;
The bright shields, horses' head-armor, and horse-armor,
Gold-colored helms, coats of mail, tunics with heraldic devices; 
Lords in richly decorated robes on their coursers,
Knights of  (their) retinues, and also squires
Nailing heads to the spear-shafts, and buckling helms;
Fitting the shields with straps, fastening with laces --
Where it is needed they were not at all idle;
The steeds frothing on the golden bridles
Gnawing, and fast the armorers also
With file and hammer are spurring to and fro;
Yeomen on foot, and foot soldiers many a one
With short staves, thick as they can go;
Pipes, trumpets, kettle drums, bugles,
That blow bloody sounds in the battle;
The palace full of people everywhere,
Here three, there ten, debating, 
Conjecturing about these two Theban knights.
Some said thus, some said "it shall be so";
Some held with him with the black beard,
Some with the bald, some with the thickly haired;
Some said he looked grim, and he would fight:
"He has a battle-ax of twenty pounds of weight."
Thus was the hall full of conjecturing,
Long after the sun began to rise.
The great Theseus, who was awakened of his sleep
By the music and noise that was made,
Remained yet in the chamber of his rich palace 
Until the Theban knights, both equally
Honored, were fetched into the palace.
Duke Theseus was set at a window,
Arrayed exactly as if he were a god on a throne.
The people press thither full soon
In order to see him, and to do great reverence,
And also to hear his command and his decision.
A herald on a scaffold made a "Ho!"
Until all the noise of people was done,
And when he saw the people all still of noise,
Then showed he the mighty duke's will:
"The lord has of his great sound judgment
Considered that it would be destruction
To gentle blood to fight in the manner
Of mortal battle now in this undertaking.
Wherefore, to arrange matters so that they shall not die,
He will modify his previous plan.
No man therefore, upon punishment of loss of life,
No sort of arrow, nor battle-axe, nor short knife
Send into the lists or bring there;
Nor short sword, to stab with piercing point,
May no man neither draw, nor bear it by his side.
And no man shall ride at his opponent
More than one course with a sharply honed spear; 
Let him thrust, if he wishes, on foot, to defend himself.
And he who is at a disadvantage shall be taken
And not slain, but be brought unto the stake
That shall be placed on either side;
But thither he must (go) by force, and remain there.
And if so happen that the chieftain be taken
On either side, or else should slay his opponent,
The tournament shall last no longer.
God give you success! Go forth and lay on fast!
With long sword and with mace fight your fill.
Go now on your way; this is the lord's will."
The voice of people touched the heaven,
So loudly they cried with merry voices,
"God save such a lord, that is so good
He desires no destruction of blood!"
Up go the trumpets and the melody,
And to the lists rides the company,
In battle array, throughout all the city, 
Hung with cloth of gold, and not with serge.
Fully like a lord this noble duke did ride,
These two Thebans upon either side,
And after rode the queen and Emelye,
And after that another company
One after another, according to their rank.
And thus they pass throughout the city,
And they come to the lists in good time.
It was not yet fully prime (nine a.m.) of the day 
When Theseus was set very splendidly and nobly,
Ypolita the queen, and Emelye,
And other ladies about in tiers.
Unto the seats press all the crowd.
And westward, through the gates under Mars,
Arcite, and also the hundred of his party,
With red banner is entered right away;
And in that same moment Palamon
Is under Venus, eastward in the place,
With white banner and hardy countenance and face.
In all the world, to seek up and down,
So evenly, without variation,
There were not two such companies,
For there was no one so wise that could say
That any one had advantage over the other 
In worthiness, nor in status, nor age,
So evenly were they chosen, as I estimate.
And in two fair ranks they arrange themselves.
When every one of their names were read,
So that in their total number there would be no deception,
Then the gates were shut, and cried was aloud:
"Do now your duty, proud young knights!"
The heralds left their spurring up and down;
Now trumpets and bugles ring loud. 
There is no more to say, but from west and east
In go the spears very firmly in the lance-rests;
In goes the sharp spur into the flank.
There people see who can joust and who can ride;
There splinter spears upon thick shields;
He feels the stabbing through the breast-bone.
Up spring spears twenty foot on height;
Out go the swords bright as silver;
The helms they hew to pieces and cut into shreds
Out burst the blood in strong red streams;
With mighty maces they break the bones to pieces.
He did thrust through the thickest of the throng;
There strong steeds stumble, and down goes all,
He rolls under foot as does a ball;
On his feet he stabs with the broken shaft of his spear,
And he hurtles him down with his horse;
He is hurt through the body and then taken,
Despite all he can do, and brought unto the stake;
As was the agreement, right there he must abide.
Another on that other side is led away.
And for a while Theseus makes them rest,
To refresh themselves and drink, if they wish.
Many times these two Thebans have  
Met together, and (each) wrought woe to his opponent;
Each has unhorsed the other of them two.
There was not any tiger in the vale of Gargaphia, 
When her whelp is stolen when it is little,
So cruel on the hunt as is Arcite
For jealous heart upon this Palamon.
Nor in Benmarin there is not so fierce a lion,
That is hunted, or maddened by his hunger,
Nor of his prey desires so the blood,
As Palamon to slay his foe Arcite.
The fervent strokes bite on their helms;
Out runs red blood on both their sides.
Some time there is an end of every deed.
For before the sun went unto its rest,
The strong king Emetreus did seize
This Palamon, as he fought with Arcite,
And made his sword deep in his flesh to bite,
And by the force of twenty he (Palamon) is taken  
Without having surrendered, and dragged to the stake.
And in the rescue of this Palamon
The strong king Lygurge is born down,
And king Emetreus, despite all his strength,
Is carried out of his saddle a sword's length,
So hit him Palamon before he was taken.
But all for naught; he was brought to the stake.
His hardy heart could not help him:
He must abide, when he was caught,
By force and also by the agreed terms of battle.
Who sorrows now but woeful Palamon,
That must no more go again to fight?
And when Theseus had seen this sight,
Unto each one of the folk that fought thus 
He cried, "Stop! no more, for it is done!  
I will be true judge, and no partisan.
Arcite of Thebes shall have Emelye,
Who by his fortune has won her fairly."
Immediately there is a noise of people begun
For joy of this, so loud and clamorous indeed
It seemed that the lists should fall.
What now can fair Venus do above?
What says she now? What does this queen of love,
But weeps so, for lack of (having) her will,
Until her tears fell in the lists? 
She said, "I am disgraced, doubtless."
Saturn said, "Daughter, hold thy peace!
Mars has his will, his knight has all his request,
And, by my head, thou shalt be relieved soon."
The trumpeters, with the loud music,
The heralds, who full loudly yell and cry,
Are in their happiest state for joy of dan Arcite.
But listen to me, and stop the noise for a little,
(Hear) what a miracle at once befell there.
This fierce Arcite has taken off his helm,
And on a war horse, to show his face,
He spurs from one end to the other of the large open space
Looking upward upon this Emelye;
And she to him cast a friendly eye
(For women, so to speak in general,
They all follow the favor of Fortune)
And was all his source of pleasure, in his heart.
Out of the ground leaped an infernal fury,
Sent from Pluto at the request of Saturn,
For which his horse for fear began to turn,
And leaped aside, and stumbled as he leaped;
And before Arcite can take heed,
He hit himself on the top of his head,
That in the place he lay as if he were dead,
His breast shattered by his saddlebow.
He lay as black as any coal or crow,
The blood was so run in his face.
Immediately he was carried out of the place,
With painful heart, to Theseus's palace.
Then was he cut out of his armor
And brought in a bed very gently and quickly,
For he was yet conscious and alive,
And always crying for Emelye.
Duke Theseus, with all his company,
Is come home to Athens, his city,
With all bliss and great solemnity.
Although this accident had happened,
He would not distress them all.
People said also that Arcite shall not dye;
He shall be healed of his injuries.
And of another thing they were as happy,
That of them all there was no one slain,
Although they (were) sorely hurt, and especially one,
Whose breastbone was pierced by a spear.
To other wounds and to broken arms
Some had salves, and some had charms;
Medicines made of herbs, and also of sage
They drank, for they wanted to have their limbs cured.
For which this noble duke, as he well knows how,
Comforts and honors every man,
And made revel all the long night
For the foreign lords, as was right.  
Nor was it considered any defeat (in battle)
But (only) as a joust or a tournament;
For truly there was no defeat.
For falling is nothing but an accident,
Nor to be led by force unto the stake
Without having surrendered, and taken by twenty knights,
One person alone, without others,
And dragged forth by arm, foot, and toe,
And also his steed driven forth with staves
By men on foot, both yeomen and also foot soldiers --
He incurred no shameful blame for it; 
No man there may call it cowardice.
For which anon duke Theseus had proclaimed,
To put a stop to all rancor and ill-will,
The victory (is given) as well to one side as to the other,
And either side equal as the other's brother; 
And gave them gifts in accordance with their ranks,
And held a feast for fully three days,
And honorably escorted the kings 
Out of his town a full day's journey.
And home went every man the direct way.
There was no more but "Fare well, have good day!"
Of this battle I will write no more,
But speak of Palamon and of Arcite.
The breast of Arcite swells, and the pain
At his heart increases more and more.
The clotted blood, despite any medical treatment,
Corrupts, and is left in the trunk of his body,
That neither blood letting at a vein, nor applying suction cups,
Nor drink of herbs can be any help to him.
The power expulsive (to expel fluids), or animal,
From that power called natural
Can not remove nor expel the poison.
The pipes of his lungs began to swell,
And every muscle down in his breast
Is destroyed by poison and corrupted matter.
Avails him neither, to preserve his life,
Vomit upward, nor downward laxative.
All is shattered in that region;
Nature now has no power to control. 
And certainly, where Nature will not work,
Fare well medicine! Go bear the man to church!
This is the whole of it, that Arcite must die;
For which he sends after Emelye,
And Palamon, who was his dear cousin.
Then said he thus, as you shall after hear:
"The woeful spirit in my heart can not
Declare one small part of all my painful sorrows
To you, my lady, whom I love most,
But I bequeath the service of my ghost
To you above every creature,
Since my life can no longer endure.
Alas, the woe! Alas, the strong pains,
That I have suffered for you, and so long!
Alas, the death! Alas, my Emelye!
Alas, separation of our company!
Alas, my heart's queen! Alas, my wife,
My heart's lady, ender of my life!
What is this world? What do people ask to have?
Now with his love, now in his cold grave
Alone, without any company.
Fare well, my sweet foe, my Emelye!
And softly take me in your two arms,
For love of God, and listen to what I say.
"I have here with my cousin Palamon
Had strife and rancor many a day ago
For love of you, and for my jealousy.
And as Jupiter may guide my soul,
To speak specifically of a servant (of love),
With all the attendant attributes truly --
That is to say, truth, honor, knighthood,
Wisdom, humbleness, rank, and noble ancestry,
Nobility of character, and all that belongs to that art --
As Jupiter may have concern for my soul,
In this world right now I know no one
So worthy to be loved as Palamon,
Who serves you, and will do so all his life.
And if ever you shall be a wife,   
Forget not Palamon, the gentle man."
And with that word his speech began to fail,
For from his feet up to his breast had come
The cold of death, which had overcome him,
And yet moreover, for in his two arms 
The vital strength is lost and all gone.
Only the intellect, nothing else,
That dwelled in his heart sick and sore,
Began to fail when the heart felt death.
His two eyes grew dark, and his breath failed,
But on his lady yet he cast his eye;
His last word was, "Mercy, Emelye!"
His spirit changed house and went where,
Since I came never (there), I can not tell where.
Therefore I stop; I am no theologian;
I find nothing about souls in this register,  
Nor do I wish to tell such beliefs  
Of them, though they write of where they (the souls) dwell.
Arcite is cold, may Mars guide his soul!
Now will I speak forth of Emelye.
Emelye shrieked, and Palamon howls,
And Theseus immediately took his sister 
Swooning, and carried her away from the corpse.
What helps it to waste the whole day
To tell how she wept both evening and morning?
For in such cases women have such sorrow,
When their husbands are gone from them,
That for the most part they so sorrow,
Or else fall in such illness
That at the last certainly they die.
Infinite are the sorrows and the tears
Of old folk and folk of tender years
In all the town for the death of this Theban.
For him there weep both child and man;
There was no such great weeping, certainly,
When Hector was brought, just recently slain,
To Troy. Alas, the lamentation that was there,
Scratching of cheeks, also tearing of hair.
"Why wouldst thou be dead," these women cry,
"Since thou haddest gold enough, and Emelye?"
No man might comfort Theseus,
Except for his old father Egeus,
Who knew the changes of this world,
As he had seen it change both up and down,
Joy after woe, and woe after gladness,
And showed them examples and comparisons.
"Right as there died never a man," said he,
"Who did not live in earth to some extent
Just so there lived never a man," he said,
"In all this world, who some time did not die.
This world is nothing but a thoroughfare full of woe,
And we are pilgrims, passing to and fro.
Death is an end of every worldly pain."
And beyond all this yet he said much more
To this effect, full wisely to exhort
The people that they should comfort themselves. 
Duke Theseus, with all his careful attention,
Considered now where the tomb
Of good Arcite may best be made,
And also most honorable in (regard to) his rank.
And at the last he concluded
That there where first Arcite and Palamon
Had the battle between them for love,
That in that same grove, sweet-smelling and green, 
Where he had his amorous desires,
His lament, and for love his hot fires,
He would make a fire in which the rite
Of a funeral he might fully perform.
And he ordered immediately to hack and hew
The old oaks, and lay them in a row
In piles arranged to burn well.
His officers with swift feet they run
And ride quickly at his commandment.
And after this, Theseus has sent
For a bier, and it all overspread
With cloth of gold, the richest that he had.
And of the same material he clad Arcite;
Upon his hands he had white gloves,
Also on his head a crown of green laurel,
And in his hand a sword full bright and keen.
He laid him, with the face bare, on the bier;
Therewith he wept that it was a pity to hear.
And in order that all the people should see him,
When it was day, he brought him to the hall,
That resounds with the crying and the sound.
Then came this woeful Theban Palamon,
With waving beard and rough hair sprinkled with ashes,
In black clothes, all sprinkled with tears;  
And, excelling others in weeping, Emelye,
The most pitiful of all the company.
In order that the ritual should be
The more noble and rich in its degree,
Duke Theseus had three steeds brought forth,
That were equipped with trappings of steel all glittering,
And covered with the coat of arms of Don Arcite.
Upon these steeds, that were large and white,
There sat folk, of which one carried his (Arcite's) shield,
Another held his spear upright in his hands,  
The third carried with him his Turkish bow
(Of pure gold was the quiver and also the fittings);
And they rode forth slowly with sorrowful demeanor
Toward the grove, as you shall later hear.
The noblest of the Greeks that were there 
Carried the bier upon their shoulders,
With slow pace and eyes red and wet,
Throughout the city by the main street,
Which was all spread with black, and wonderfully high
The street is covered with exactly the same.
Upon the right hand went old Egeus,
And on that other side duke Theseus,
With vessels of pure gold in their hands,
All full of honey, milk, and blood, and wine;
Also Palamon, with a very large company;
And after that came woeful Emelye,
With fire in hand, as was at that time the custom,
To do the office of funeral service.
Much labor and full great preparation 
Was at the service and the fire-making,
Which with its green top reached the heaven;
And twenty fathom of breadth the sides stretched --
This is to say, the boughs were so broad.
There was first laid very many a load of straw.
But how the fire was made on high,
Nor also the names that the trees are called,
Such as oak, fir, birch, aspen, alder, holm oak, poplar,
Willow, elm, plane, ash, box, chestnut, linden, laurel,
Maple, thorn, beech, hazel, yew, dogwood --
How they were cut down shall not be told by me;
Nor how the gods ran up and down,
Disinherited of their habitation,
In which they dwelt in rest and peace,
Nymphs, fawns and hamadryades (wood nymphs);
Nor how the beasts and the birds all
Fled for fear, when the wood was cut down;
Nor how frightened by the light was the ground,
Which was not accustomed to see the bright sun;
Nor how the fire was laid first with straw,
And then with dry branches cut in thirds,
And then with green wood and mixtures of spices,
And then with cloth of gold and with precious stones
And garlands, hanging with full many a flower;
The myrrh, the incense, with such great fragrance;
Nor how Arcite lay among all this,
Nor what richness about his body is;
Nor how Emelye, as was the custom,
Lighted the fire of funeral service;
Nor how she swooned when men made the fire,
Nor what she spoke, nor what was her desire;
Nor what jewels men threw in the fire,
When the fire was great and burned fast;
Nor how some threw their shields, and some their spears,
And of their vestments, which they wore,
And cups full of wine, and milk, and blood,
Into the fire, that burned as if it were mad;
Nor how the Greeks, with a huge company,
Thrice ride all the fire about
Upon the left hand, with a loud shouting,
And thrice with their spears clattering;
And thrice how the ladies did cry;
And how Emelye was led homeward;
Nor how Arcite is burned to cold ashes;
Nor how that wake was held  
All that same night; nor how the Greeks play
The funeral games I care not to say
Who wrestles best, naked with oil anointed,
Nor who bore him best, in any difficulty.
I will not tell also how they go
Home to Athens, when the games are done;
But shortly to the point then I will go
And make an end of my long tale.
By the course of events and by length of a certain number of years,
All stopped is the mourning and the tears
Of the Greeks, by one general assent.
Then it seemed to me there was a parliament
At Athens, upon certain topics and cases;
Among which topics was discussed (a proposal)
To have alliance with certain countries,
And have fully the submission of the Thebans.
For which this noble Theseus immediately
Ordered (someone) to send for gentle Palamon,
Unknown by him (Palamon) what was the cause and why,
But in his black clothes sorrowfully
He came at his (Theseus's) commandment in haste.
Then Theseus sent for Emelye.
When they were set, and all the place was hushed,
And Theseus had waited for a while
Before any word came from his wise breast,
He set his eyes where his object of desire was.
And with a sad face he sighed softly,
And after that exactly thus he pronounced his decision:
"The First Mover of the First Cause above,
When he first made the faire chain of love,
Great was the effect, and noble was his plan.
Well knew he why, and what thereof he meant,
For with that faire chain of love he bound
The fire, the air, the water, and the land
In definite bounds, from which they may not flee.
That same Prince and that Mover," said he,
"Has established in this wretched world below
Specific (numbers of) days and  (term of) duration
To all that is engendered in this place,
Beyond the which day they can not pass,
Although they may yet well shorten those days.
There is no need to cite any written authority,
For it is proven by experience,
Unless I wish to make my meaning more clear.
Then one can by this order well discern
That that same Mover is stable and eternal.
Well may one know, unless it be a fool,
That every part derives from its whole,
For nature has not taken its beginning
Of no part or portion of a thing,
But of a thing that is complete and stable,
Descending (from that) until it becomes corruptible.
And therefore, by his wise foresight,
He has so well established his plan
That types of being and natural processes
Shall endure (for a set time) one after another,
And not eternally, without any lie.
This thou canst understand and plainly see.
"Lo the oak, that is so slow to mature,
From the time that it first begins to spring,
And has so long a life, as we may see,
Yet at the last the tree is wasted away.
"Consider also how the hard stone
Under our feet, on which we tread and go,
Eventually it is worn away as it lies by the way.
The broad river sometimes grows dry;
We see the great cities grow weak and pass away.
Then you can see that all things have an end.
"Of man and woman also we see well 
That by necessity, in one of these two periods of time --
This is to say, in youth or else in age --
He must be dead, the king as must a servant boy;
One in his bed, one in the deep sea,
One in the large field, as people can see;
Nothing helps there; all goes that same way.
Then may I say that all things must die.
"What causes this but Jupiter, the king,
Who is prince and cause of all things,
Causing all to return to its own origin
From which it is derived, to tell the truth?
And against this no living creature,
Of any rank, is helped by striving.
"Then is it wisdom, as it seems to me,
To make virtue of necessity,
And take it well what we may not escape,
And namely that which is due to us all.
And whoever complains in any way, he does folly,
And is rebel to Him that can rule all.
And certainly a man has most honor
To die in his (time of) excellence and flower,
When he is sure of his good name;
Then he has not done his friend, nor himself, any shame.
And his friend ought to be more pleased with his death,
When his breath is yielded up with honor,
Than when his name is faded because of age,
For all forgotten is his knightly prowess.
Then is it best, for a worthy fame,
To die when he has the most fame.
"The contrary of all this is willfulness.
Why do we complain, why do we have sadness,
That good Arcite, flower of chivalry,
Is departed with all due honor
Out of this foul prison of this life?
Why do his cousin and his wife complain here
Of the welfare of him, who loved them so well?
Can he show them his gratitude? Nay, God knows, not a bit;
They offend both his soul and themselves as well,
And as yet they may not change their desires.
"What  can I conclude of this long argument,
But after woe I advise us to be merry
And thank Jupiter for all his grace?
And before we depart from this place
I advise that we make of two sorrows 
One perfect joy, lasting evermore.
And look now, where most sorrow is herein,
There will we first amend and begin.
"Sister," said he, "this is my full intention,
With all the advice of my parliament here,
That gentle Palamon, your own knight,
Who serves you with will, heart, and might,
And ever has done so since you first knew him,
That you shall of your grace have pity upon him,
And take him for husband and for lord.
Lend me your hand, for this is our decision.
Let your womanly pity now be seen.
He is a king's brother's son, indeed;
And even if he were a poor young knight,
Since he has served you so many a year,
And has had for you such great adversity,
It must be taken in account, believe me,
For gentle mercy ought to prevail over justice."
Then said he thus to Palamon the knight:
"I suppose little preaching is needed here
To make you assent to this thing.
Come near, and take your lady by the hand."
Between them was made right away the bond
That is called matrimony or marriage,
By all the council and the baronage.
And thus with all bliss and festivity
Palamon has wedded Emelye.
And God, who has made all this wide world,
Send him his love who has dearly paid for it;
For now is Palamon in complete happiness,
Living in bliss, in riches, and in health,
And Emelye loves him so tenderly,
And he serves her so gently,
That never was there any word between them 
Of jealousy or any other vexation.
Thus ends Palamon and Emelye;
And God save all this fair company! Amen.
