I suppose men would consider it negligence
If I forget to tell the expenditure
Of Theseus, who goes (about) so busily
To build the lists royally,
That such a noble theatre as it was
I dare well say there was not (another such) in this world.
The circumference was a mile around,
Walled with stone, and surrounded by a ditch.
Round was the shape, in the manner of a circle,
Full of tiers of seats, the height of sixty paces,
That when a man was set on one tier of seats,
He did not hinder his fellow from seeing.
Eastward there stood a gate of white marble,
Westward just such another on the opposite (side).
And shortly to conclude, such a place
Was none in earth, (constructed) in so little time;
For in the land there was no skilled man
Who knows geometry or arithmetic,
Nor painter, nor carver of images,
That Theseus did not give him food and wages
To make and devise the theatre.
And to do his rite and sacrifice,
He has eastward, upon the gate above,
In worship of Venus, goddess of love,
Had made an altar and a chapel;
And on the westward gate, in memory
Of Mars, he has made just such another,
That cost fully a cartload of gold.
And northward, in a turret on the wall,
Of white alabaster and red coral,
A chapel, rich to look upon,
In worship of Diana of chastity,
Has Theseus had made in noble style.
But yet had I forgotten to describe
The noble sculpture and the portraits,
The shape, the appearance, and the figures
That were in these three chapels.
First in the temple of Venus canst thou see
Wrought on the wall, full piteous to behold,
The broken sleeps, and the cold sighs,
The sacred tears, and the lamenting,
The fiery strokes of the desiring
That love's servants endure in this life;
The oaths that assure their covenants;
Pleasure and Hope, Desire, Foolhardiness,
Beauty and Youth, Mirth, Riches,
Charms and Force, Lies, Flattery,
Expenditures, Attentiveness, and Jealousy,
Who wore a garland of yellow marigolds,
And a cuckoo sitting on her hand;
Feasts, musical instruments, dance-songs, dances,
Desire and festivity, and all the details
Of love, which I recounted and shall recount,
Were painted in sequence on the wall,
And more than I can make mention of.
For truly all the mount of Cithaeron,
Where Venus has her principal dwelling,
Was shown on the wall in portraits,
With all the garden (of Love) and the pleasure.
The porter, Idleness, was not forgotten 
Nor the handsome Narcissus of many years ago,
Nor yet the folly of king Solomon,
Nor yet the great strength of Hercules --
The enchantments of Medea and Circes --
Nor of Turnus, with the hardy fierce courage,
The riche Cresus, wretched in servitude.
Thus can you see that wisdom nor riches,
Beauty nor trickery, strength nor bravery,
Can not share power with Venus,
For she may rule the world as she pleases.
Lo, all these folk were so caught in her snare,
Until for woe they very often said "alas!"
One or two examples here suffice,
Even though I could recount a thousand more.
The statue of Venus, glorious to look upon,
Was naked, floating in the large sea,
And from the navel down all was covered 
With waves green and bright as any glass.
She had a citole (zither-like instrument) in her right hand,
And on her head, very elegant to look upon,
A rose garland, fresh and fragrant;
Above her head her doves fluttering.
Before her stood her son Cupid;
He had two wings upon his shoulders,
And he was blind, as it is often seen;
He carried a bow and arrows bright and keen.
Why should I not as well also tell you all
The portraiture that was upon the wall
Within the temple of mighty Mars the red?
All painted was the wall, in length and breadth,
Like to the interior of the grisly place
That is called the Great Temple of Mars in Thrace,
In that same cold, frosty region
Where Mars has his most excellent mansion.  
First a forest was painted on the wall,
In which there dwells neither man nor beast,
With knotty, gnarled, barren old trees,
Of stumps sharp and hideous to behold,
Through which there ran a rumbling in a moaning of wind,
As though a storm should burst every bough.
And downward from a hill, close to a grassy slope,
There stood the temple of Mars, powerful in arms,
Wrought all of burnished steel, of which the entry
Was long and narrow, and frightening to look upon.  
And out of there came a rush of wind and such a blast
That it made all the gate to shake.
The northern light shone in at the doors,
For there was no window on the wall,
Through which men might discern any light.
The door was all of eternal adamant (hardest of stones),
Bound crosswise and lengthwise 
With tough iron; and to make it strong,
Every pillar, to support the temple,
Was big as a large barrel, (made) of iron bright and shining.
There I saw first the malicious plotting
Of Felony, and all the scheming;
The cruel Anger, red as any glowing coal;
The pick-purse, and also the pale Fear;
The smiler with the knife under the cloak;
The stable burning with the black smoke;
The treason of the murdering in the bed;
The open war, all covered with blood from wounds:
Strife, with bloody knife and sharp menacing.
All full of creaking was that sorry place.
There yet I saw slayer of himself there --
His heart-blood has bathed all his hair --
The nail driven in the top of the head at night;
The cold death, with mouth gaping upwards.
Amidst the temple sat Misfortune,
With grief and sorry countenance.
Yet I saw Madness, laughing in his rage,
Armed Discontent, Alarm, and fierce Violence;
The corpse in the woods, with (its) throat cut;
A thousand slain, and not killed by the plague;
The tyrant, with his prey taken by force;
The town destroyed, there was nothing left.
Yet I saw burned the ships dancing (on the waves);
The hunter killed by the wild bears;
The sow devouring the child right in the cradle;
The cook scalded, despite his long-handled spoon.
Nothing concerning the evil influence of Mars was forgotten.
The wagon driver run over by his wagon --   
He lay down full low under the wheel.
There were also, of those influenced by Mars,
The barber, and the butcher, and the smith,
Who forges sharp swords on his anvil.
And all above, painted in a tower,
I saw conquest, sitting in great honor,
With the sharp sword over his head
Hanging by a thin thread of twine.
Depicted was the slaughter of Julius,
Of great Nero, and of Antonius;
Although at that same time they were unborn,
Yet was their death depicted before then
By menacing of Mars, according to the horoscope;
So was it shown in that portraiture,
As is depicted in the stars above
Who shall be slain or else dead for love.
Suffices one illustrative tale in old histories; 
I can not recount them all even if I desired to.
The statue of Mars stood upon a chariot
Armed, and looked as grim as if he were mad;
And over his head there shine two figures
Of stars, that are called in books,
That one Puella, that other Rubeus --
This god of arms was arrayed thus.
A wolf stood there before him at his feet
With red eyes, and he ate of a man;
With subtle brush was depicted this story
In reverence of Mars and of his glory.
Now to the temple of Diana the chaste,
As briefly as I can, I will hasten myself,
To tell you all the description.
The walls are painted all over
(With scenes) of hunting and of modest chastity.
There I saw how woeful Callisto,
When Diana was angry with her,
Was turned from a woman into a bear,
And after she was made the North Star
Thus was it painted; I can tell you no more.
Her son is also a star, as one can see.
There I saw Daphne, turned into a tree --
I mean not the goddess Diana,
But Penneus' daughter, who is called Daphne.
There I saw Actaeon changed into a hart,
For vengeance that he saw Diana all naked;
I saw how his hounds have caught him 
And devoured him, because they did not know him.
Yet was painted a little further on 
How Atalanta hunted the wild boar,
And Meleager, and many more others,
For which Diana wrought him care and woe.
There I saw many another wonderful story,
The which I do not desire to call to mind.
This goddess sat full high on a hart,
With small hounds all about her feet,
And underneath her feet she had a moon --
Waxing it was and should wane soon.
Her statue was clothed in yellowish green,
With bow in hand and arrows in a quiver.
She cast her eyes down full low 
Where Pluto has his dark region.
A woman in childbirth was before her;
But because her child was so long unborn,
Very piteously did she call on Lucina 
And said, "Help, for thou canst (do so) best of all!"
He who made it well knew how to paint in a life-like manner;
With many a florin he bought the paints.
Now these lists are made, and Theseus,
Who at his great cost thus prepared
The temples and the theatre in all respects,
When it was done, it greatly pleased him.
But I will stop speaking of Theseus a little while,
And speak of Palamon and of Arcite.
The day of their return approaches,
When each one should bring a hundred knights
To decide the battle, as I told you.
And to Athens, to keep their agreement,
Each one of them has brought a hundred knights,
Well armed for the battle in all respects.
And surely many a man there believed
That never, since the world began,
To speak of knighthood of (the deeds of) their hand,
As far as God has made sea or land,
Was not of so few so noble a company.
For every person that loved chivalry
And would, willingly, have an outstanding reputation
Has prayed that he might participate in that game;
And well it was for him who was chosen to be there,
For if there fell tomorrow such a situation,
You know well that every vigorous  knight
Who loves passionately and has his might,
Were it in England or elsewhere,
They would, willingly, desire to be there --
To fight for a lady, bless me! 
It would be a pleasing sight to see.
And right so fared those with Palamon.
With him there went knights many a one;
One of them will be armed in a coat of mail,
And in a breastplate and a light tunic;
And one of them will have a set of plate armor;
And one of them will have a Prussian shield or a buckler;
One of them will be well armed on his legs,
And have an axe, and one a mace of steel --
There is no new fashion that has not been old.
They were armed, as I have told you,
Every one according to his preference.
There mayst thou seen, coming with Palamon,
Lycurgus himself, the great king of Thrace.
Black was his beard, and manly was his face;
The circles of his eyes in his head,
They glowed between yellow and red,
And he looked about like a griffin (with an eagle's head),
With shaggy hairs on his stout brows;
His limbs large, his muscles hard and strong,
His shoulders broad, his arms round and long;
And as was the fashion in his country,
He stood full high upon a chariot of gold,
With four white bulls in the traces.
Instead of a tunic with his coat of arms over his armor,
With claws yellow and bright as any gold, 
He had a bear's skin, coal-black because of age.
His long hair was combed behind his back;
Like any raven's feather it shone because of its blackness;
A wreath of gold, thick as an arm, of huge weight,
Upon his head, set full of bright stones,
Of fine rubies and of diamonds.
About his chariot there went white wolfhounds,
Twenty and more, as big as any steer,
To hunt for the lion or the deer,
And followed him with muzzles securely bound,
Wearing collars of gold, and rings for leashes filed round.
He had a hundred lords in his company,
Very well armed, with stern and stout hearts.
With Arcite, as people find in histories,
The great Emetreus, the king of India,
Upon a reddish-brown steed with trappings of steel,
Covered in cloth of gold, well decorated  (with geometric patterns),
Came riding like the god of arms, Mars.
His tunic with his coat of arms was of cloth of Tarsia (in Turkestan)
Adorned with pearls white and round and big;
His saddle was newly adorned with pure gold;
A short cloak hanging upon his shoulder,
Brimful of rubies red as sparkling fire;
His curly hair like rings was run (fashioned),
And that was yellow, and glittered like the sun.
His nose was high, his eyes bright lemon yellow,
His lips round, his color was ruddy;
A few freckles were sprinkled in his face,
Between yellow and somewhat mingled with black;
And as a lion he cast about his look.
I reckon his age at five and twenty years.
His beard had well begun to spring;
His voice was like a trumpet thundering.
Upon his head he wore of green laurel 
A garland, fresh and pleasing to look upon.
Upon his hand he carried for his delight
A tame eagle, white as any lily.
He had a hundred lords with him there,
All armed, except for their heads, in all their equipment,
Very richly in every detail.
For trust well that dukes, earls, kings
Were gathered in this noble company,
For love and for the benefit of chivalry.
About this king there ran on all sides  
Full many a tame lion and leopard.
And in this manner these lords, one and all,
Are come to the city on the Sunday 
About nine a.m., and in the town dismounted.
This Theseus, this duke, this worthy knight,
When he had brought them into his city,
And provided them lodging, each one according to his rank,
He feasts them, and does such great labor
To entertain them and do them all honor
That people still believe that the wit of no man
Of any rank could do better.
The music, the service at the feast,
The great gifts to every one,
The rich adornment of Theseus' palace,
Nor who sat first nor last upon the dais,
What ladies are fairest or best in dancing,
Or which of them can dance best and sing,
Nor who speaks most feelingly of love;
What hawks sit on the perch above,
What hounds lie down on the floor --
I now make no mention of all this,
But (speak only) of the substance; that seems to me the best.
Now comes the point, and listen if you please.
The Sunday night, before day began to spring,
When Palamon heard the lark sing
(Although it was not day by two hours,
Yet sang the lark) and Palamon right then
With pious heart and with a noble disposition,
He rose to go on his pilgrimage
To the blessed gracious Citherea --
I mean Venus, honorable and worshipful.
And in her (planetary) hour he walks forth slowly
Unto the lists where her temple was,
And down he kneels, and with humble expression
And painful heart he said as you shall hear:
"Fairest of the fair, O lady mine, Venus,
Daughter to Jove and spouse of Vulcan,
Thou maker of joy of the mount of Citheron,
For that same love thou haddest to Adonis,
Have pity on my bitter, smarting tears,
And take my humble prayer to thy heart.
Alas! I do not have any language to tell
The effects nor the torments of my hell;
My heart can not reveal my harms;
I am so befuddled that I can not say (anything)
But `Mercy, lady bright, who knowest well
My thought and seest what harms I feel!'
Consider all this and have pity upon my pain,
As surely as I shall for evermore,
According to my power (as much as I can), be thy true servant,
And make war always against chastity.
I make that my vow, providing you help me!
I care not to boast of arms 
Nor do I ask to have victory tomorrow,
Nor renown in this case, nor vain glory
Nor fame for deeds of arms proclaimed everywhere;
But I would have fully possession
Of Emelye, and die in thy service.
Find thou the manner how and in what way:
I care not if it may better be
To have victory over them, or they over me,
So that I have my lady in my arms.
For though it be true that Mars is god of arms,
Your power is so great in heaven above
That if you please, I shall well have my love.
I will worship thy temple evermore,
And on thy altar, whether I ride or walk (whatever I do),
I will do sacrifice and kindle fires.
And if you will not (do) so, my lady sweet,
Then I pray thee, tomorrow with a spear
That Arcite stab me through the heart.
Then I care not, when I have lost my life,
Though Arcite win her to be his wife.
This is the substance and goal of my prayer:
Give me my love, thou blessed dear lady."
When the prayer of Palamon was done,
He did his sacrifice, and that quickly,
Full piteously, with all due ceremony,
Although I tell not now his observances;
But at the last the statue of Venus shook,
And made a sign, whereby he understood
That his prayer was accepted that day.
For though the sign showed a delay,
Yet he knew well that his request was granted,
And with glad heart he went home very soon.
The third planetary hour after Palamon
Began to go to Venus' temple,
Up rose the sun, and up rose Emelye
And to the temple of Diana did hasten.
Her maidens, whom she led thither with her,
They had the fire full readily with them,
The incense, the cloths, and all the rest
That is needed for the sacrifice;
The horns full of mead, as was the custom --
There lacked nothing (needed) to do her sacrifice.
The temple smoking (with incense), full of fair cloths,
This Emelye, with gentle heart,
Washed her body with water of a well.
But how she did her rite I dare not tell,
Unless it be some thing in general; 
And yet it would be a pleasure to hear all.
To one who means well it would be no matter of concern;
But it is good for a man to be without restriction (speak freely).
Her bright hair was combed, all loose;
A crown of an evergreen oak 
Was set upon her head full fair and suitable.
Two fires on the altar did she kindle,
And did her duties, as men can behold
In Statius' <i>Thebaid</i> and such old books.
When the fire was kindled, with a pitiful expression
Unto Diana she spoke as you may hear:
"O chaste goddess of the green woods,
To whom both heaven and earth and sea is visible,
Queen of the dark and low reign of Pluto,
Goddess of maidens, whom my heart hast known
Full many a year, and knowest what I desire,
Keep me from thy vengeance and thy ire,
Which Acteon paid for cruelly.
Chaste goddess, well knowest thou that I
Desire to be a maiden all my life,
Nor never will I be no lover nor wife.
I am, thou knowest, yet of thy company,
A maiden, and love hunting and the chase,
And to walk in the wild woods,
And not to be a wife and be with child.
I do not desire to know company of man.
Now help me, lady, since you can and know how,
For those three forms that thou hast in thee.
And Palamon, that has such love to me,
And also Arcite, who loves me so painfully,
This grace I pray thee and ask no more,
Send love and peace between them two,
And turn away their hearts from me so
That all their hot love and their desire,
And all their intense torment, and their fire
Will be quenched, or turned to another place.
And if it so be thou wilt not do me grace,
Or if my destiny is shaped so
That I must by necessity have one of them two,
Send me him who most desires me.
Behold, goddess of clean chastity,
The bitter tears that fall on my cheeks.
Since thou art maiden and guardian of us all,
Thou care for and well conserve my maidenhood,
And while I live, as a maiden I will serve thee."
The fires burn brightly upon the altar,
While Emelye was thus in her prayer.
But suddenly she saw a curious sight,
For right away one of the fires quenched
And rekindled again, and after that straightway
That other fire was quenched and all gone;
And as it quenched it made a roaring sound,
As these wet brands do in their burning,
And at the brand's end (the fire) ran out straightway
As if it were many bloody drops;
For which so sorely frightened was Emelye
That she was well nigh mad and began to cry,
For she did not know what it signified,
But simply for fear has she cried thus,
And wept that it was a pity to hear.
And right then Diana did appear,
With bow in hand, just like a huntress,
And said, "Daughter, cease thy sadness.
Among the high gods it is affirmed,
And by eternal word written and confirmed,
Thou shalt be wedded unto one of those
Who have for thee so much care and woe,
But unto which of them I may not tell.
Farwell, for I can stay no longer .
The fires which burn on my altar 
Shall declare to thee, before thou go hence,
Thy destiny concerning love, as in this situation."
And with that word, the arrows in the quiver
Of the goddess clatter fast and ring,
And forth she went and vanished;
For which this Emelye was astonished,
And said, "What does this mean, alas?
I put me in thy protection,
Diana, and in thy power."
And home she goes at once the nearest way.
This is the substance; there is no more to say.
The next (planetary) hour of Mars following this,
Arcite has walked unto the temple 
Of fierce Mars to do his sacrifice,
With all the rites of his pagan manner (of worship).
With sorrowful heart and intense devotion,
Right thus to Mars he said his prayer:
"O strong god, who in the cold reigns 
Of Thrace art honored and considered lord,
And hast in every reign and every land
All the control of arms in thy hand,
And grants them fortune as it pleases thee to command.
Accept of me my sorrowful sacrifice.
If it so be that my youth may deserve,
And that my power be worthy to serve
Thy godhead, so that I may be one of thine,
Then pray I thee to have pity upon my pain.
For that same pain and that same hot fire
In which thou once burned for desire,
When that thou enjoyed the beauty
Of fair, young, fresh Venus the noble,
And haddest her in arms as you wished --
Although once things went wrong for you,
When Vulcan had caught thee in his snare
And found thee lying by his wife, alas! --
For that same sorrow that was in thy heart,
Have pity as well upon my painful sufferings. 
I am young and ignorant, as thou knowest,
And, as I suppose, injured most by love 
Than ever was any living creature,
For she that causes me to endure all this woe 
Nor cares never whether I sink or swim.
And well I know, before she may promise me mercy,
I must win her with strength in the lists,
And well I know, without help or grace
Of thee my strength can not avail.
Then help me, lord, tomorrow in my battle,
For that same fire that once burned thee,
As well as that same fire now burns me,
And bring it about so that I have victory tomorrow.
Mine be the labor, and thine be the glory!
I will most honor thy most excellent temple
Over any place, and always most labor
In thy pleasure and in thy strong crafts,
And in thy temple I will hang my banner 
And all the arms of my company,
And evermore, until that day I die,
Eternal fire I will provide before thee (on your altar).
And also I will bind myself to this vow:
My beard, my hair, that hangs long down,
That never yet felt injury
Of razor nor of shears, I will give thee,
And be thy true servant while I live.
Now, lord, have pity upon my painful sorrows;
Give me victory; I ask of thee no more."
The prayer of Arcite the strong stopped,
The rings that hung on the temple door,
And also the doors, clattered very fast,
Of which Arcite was somewhat afraid.
The fires upon the altar burned (so) brightly 
That it began to illuminate all the temple;
A sweet smell the ground at once yielded up,
And Arcite immediately raised up his hand,
And he cast more incense into the fire,
With more other rites; and at the last
The statue of Mars began to ring its coat of mail,
And with that sound he heard a murmuring
Very low and faint, that said thus, "Victory!"
For which he (Arcite) gave to Mars honor and glory.
And thus with joy and hope to fare well
Arcite at once is gone unto his lodging,
As happy as a fowl is for the bright sun.
And right away such strife there is begun,
Because of that same grant, in the heaven above, 
Between Venus, the goddess of love,
And Mars, the stern god powerful in arms,
That Jupiter was hard put to stop it,
Until the pale Saturn the hostile,
Who knew so many of old adventures,
Found in his old experience a plan
That he full soon has pleased every side.
As is truly said, old age has a great advantage;
In old age is both wisdom and experience;
One can outrun the old but not outwit them.
Saturn anon, to stop strife and fear,  
Although it is against his natural disposition,
He found a remedy for all this strife.
"My dear daughter Venus," said Saturn,
"My orbit, that has so wide (a course) to turn,
Has more power than any man knows.
Mine is the drowning in the sea so dark;
Mine is the imprisonment in the dark cell;
Mine is the killing and hanging by the throat,
The murmur (of discontent) and the churls' rebelling,
The grumbling, and the secret poisoning;
I exact vengeance and do full punishment,
While I dwell in the (zodiacal) sign of the lion.
Mine is the ruin of the high halls,
The falling of the towers and of the walls
Upon the miner or the carpenter.
I slew Sampson, shaking the pillar;
And mine are the cold maladies,
The dark treasons, and the old plots;
My (astrological) aspect is the father of pestilence.
Now weep no more; I shall do my diligence
So that Palamon, who is thine own knight,
Shall have his lady, as thou hast promised him.
Though Mars shall help his knight, yet nonetheless
Between you there must be peace sometime,
Although you are not of one (the same) temperament,
Which daily causes such dissension.
I am thy grandfather, ready (to do) as you wish;
Weep now no more; I will fulfill thy desire."
Now I will stop (speaking) of the gods above,
Of Mars, and of Venus, goddess of love,
And tell you as plainly as I can
The essential part, for which I began.
