When Arcite was come to Thebes,
Very often each day he grew faint and said "Alas!"
For he shall never more see his lady.
And shortly to conclude (telling) all his woe,
So much sorrow never had creature
That is, or shall (be), while the world may endure.
He is bereft of his sleep, his food, his drink
So that he became lean and dry as is a stick;
His eyes sunken and grisly to behold,
His hue sickly yellow and pale as cold ashes,
And he was solitary and ever alone,
And wailing all the night, making his moan;
And if he heard song or instrument,
Then would he weep, he could not be stopped.
So feeble also were his spirits, and so low,
And changed so, that no man could know
His speech nor his voice, though men heard it.
And in his behavior for all the world he fared
Not only like the lover's malady
Of Hereos, but rather like mania,
Engendered by the melancholic humor 
In the front lobe, in his imagination.
And shortly, all was turned topsy-turvy
Both the physical condition and also the mental disposition
Of him, this woeful lover dan Arcite.
Why should I all daylong write of his woe?
When he had endured a year or two
This cruel torment and this pain and woe,
At Thebes, in his country, as I said,
Upon one night as he laid himself in sleep,
It seemed to him that the winged god Mercury
Stood before him and commanded him to be merry.
His sleep-inducing staff he carried upright in his hand;
He wore a hat upon his bright hair.
This god was dressed, as he (Arcite) noticed,
As he was when he put Argus to sleep;
And said to him thus: "To Athens shalt thou go,
Where an end of thy woe is destined for thee."
And with that word Arcite awoke and leaped up.
"Now truly, however sorely it may pain me,"
Said he, "I will go to Athens right now,
Nor shall I refrain for the dread of death 
From seeing my lady, whom I love and serve.
In her presence I care not if I die."
And with that word he picked up a large mirror,
And saw that all his color was changed,
And saw his visage all (changed) to another sort.
And right away it ran to him in his mind,
That, since his face was so disfigured
By the malady which he had endured,
He might well, if he conducted himself humbly,
Live in Athens evermore unknown,
And see his lady almost every day.
And right away he changed his clothing,
And clad himself as a poor laborer,
And all alone, except only a squire
Who knew his private affairs and all his situation,
Who was disguised as poorly as he was,
To Athens he is gone the nearest way.
And to the court he went upon a day,
And at the gate he offers his service
To drudge and draw water, whatever men will command.
And shortly to speak of this matter,
He was given employment by a household attendant
Who was dwelling with Emelye,
For he was wise and could soon take the measure
Of every servant, who serves here.
He could well hew wood, and carry water,
For he was young and mighty indeed,
And moreover he was tall and strong of bones
To do what any one can command him.
A year or two he was in this service,
Page of the chamber of Emelye the bright,
And he said that he was called Philostrate.
But half so well beloved a man as he
Was never in court (anyone) of his rank;
He was so noble in manner
That his fame was (spread) throughout all the court .
They said that it would be a act of charity
If Theseus would advance his rank,
And put him in noble employment,
Where he could exercise his abilities.
And thus within a short time his fame is sprung,
Both for his deeds and his good speech,
That Theseus has taken him so near
That he has made him a squire of his chamber,
And gave him gold to maintain (a life style suitable to) his rank.
And also men brought him out of his country,
From year to year, very secretly, his income;
But properly and slyly he spent it,
So that no man wondered how he acquired it.
And three years in this manner he led his life,
And conducted himself so that, in peace and also in war,
There was no man whom Theseus holds dearer.
And in this bliss I now leave Arcite,
And I will speak of Palamon a little.
These seven years Palamon has sat 
Wasted by suffering, what for woe and for distress.
Who feels double pain and sadness
But Palamon, whom love so afflicts
That he goes mad, out of his wits because of woe?
And also moreover he is a prisoner
Perpetually, not just for a year.
Who could rime in English properly
His martyrdom? In truth it is not I;
Therefore I pass on as quickly as I can.
It happened that in the seventh year, of May
The third night (as old books say,
That tell all this story more fully),
Whether it was by chance or fate --
As, when a thing is pre-ordained, it must be --
That soon after midnight Palamon,
With the help of a friend, broke out of his prison
And flees the city as fast as he can go.
For he had so given his jailer drink 
Of a spiced and sweetened drink made of a certain wine,
With narcotics and pure opium of Thebes,
That all that night, though men would shake him,
The jailer slept; he could not awake.
And thus he flees as fast as ever he can.
The night was short and very close to the day
So that by necessity he must hide himself,
And to a grove close by 
With fearful foot then stalks Palamon.
For, shortly, this was his idea:
That in that grove he would hide himself all day,
And in the night then he would take his way
Toward Thebes, to pray his friends 
To help him to wage war on Theseus;
And shortly, he would either lose his life
Or win Emelye to be his wife.
This is the purpose and his full intent.
Now I will turn again to Arcite,
That little knew how near his trouble was,
To which Fortune had brought him in the snare.
The busy lark, messenger of day,
Salutes the morning gray in her song,
And fiery Phoebus rises up so bright
That all the orient laughs because of the light,
And with his rays dries in the groves
The silver drops hanging on the leaves.
And Arcite, who in the royal court
With Theseus is chief squire,
Is risen and looks on the merry day.
And to do his observance to May,
Meditating on the object of his desire,
He on a war horse, leaping about like the fire,
Has ridden into the fields to amuse himself,
Out of the court, about a mile or two.
And to the grove of which I told you 
By chance he began to hold his way 
To make himself a garland of the branches,
Were it of woodbine or hawthorn leaves,
And loud he sang in the bright sun:
"May, with all thy flowers and thy greenery,
Welcome be thou, fair, fresh May,
In hope that I can get something green."
And from his war horse, with an eager heart,
He rushed into the grove hastily,
And in a path he roams up and down,
Where by chance this Palamon
Was in a thicket, so that no man could see him,
For he was sorely afraid of his death.
In no way did he know that it was Arcite;
God knows he would scarcely have believed it
But truly it is said, since many years ago,
That "field has eyes and the wood has ears."
It is very good for a man to act calmly,
For every day people meet at unexpected times.
Arcite knows full little of his fellow,
Who was near enough to hear all his speech,
For in the thicket he sits now very still.
When Arcite had roamed all his fill,
And sung all the rondel cheerfully,
As these lovers do in their strange manners,
Now in the tree top, now down in the briars,
Now up, now down, like a bucket in a well.
Exactly like the Friday, truly for to tell,
Now it shines, now it rains hard,
Just so can fickle Venus sadden
The hearts of her folk; just as her day
Is changeable, just so she changes her array.
Friday is seldom like all the rest of the week.
When Arcite had sung, he began to sigh
And sat himself down without any more.
"Alas," he said, "that day that I was born!
How long, Juno, through thy cruelty,
Wilt thou make war on the city of Thebes?
Alas, to ruin is brought
The royal blood of Cadmus and Amphion --
Of Cadmus, who was the first man
Who built Thebes, before the town first began,
And first was crowned king of the city.
I am of his lineage and his offspring
By true lineage, of the royal family,
And now I am so wretched and so enslaved,
That he who is my mortal enemy,
I meekly serve him as his squire.
And yet Juno does me much more shame,
For I dare not acknowledge my own name;
But whereas I was accustomed to be called Arcite,
Now I am called Philostrate, not worth a penny.
Alas, thou fierce Mars! Alas, Juno!
Thus has your anger destroyed all our lineage,
Save only me and wretched Palamon,
Whom Theseus torments in prison.
And in addition to all this, to slay me utterly
Love has his fiery dart so ardently
Stabbed through my faithful, sorrowful heart
That my death was destined before my first garment was made.
You slay me with your eyes, Emelye!
You are the cause by which I die.
Of all the rest of my other troubles
I do not reckon at the value of a weed,
Provided that I could do anything to please you."
And with that word he fell down in a trance
A long time, and afterwards he leaped up.
This Palamon, that thought that through his heart
He felt a cold sword suddenly glide,
For anger he trembled; no longer would he wait.
And when he had heard Arcite's tale,
As if he were mad, with face dead and pale,
He leaped up out of the thick bushes 
And said: "Arcite, false, wicked traitor,
Now art thou taken, who lovest my lady so,
For whom that I have all this pain and woe,
And art of my blood, and sworn to be in my confidence,
As I full often have told thee before now,
And hast tricked here duke Theseus,
And thus hast falsely changed thy name!
I will be dead, or else thou shalt die.
Thou shalt not love my lady Emelye,
But I will love her only and no other;
For I am Palamon, thy mortal foe.
And though I have no weapon in this place,
But out of prison am escaped by good luck,
I doubt not that either thou shalt dye,
Either thou shalt not love Emelye,
Choose which thou wish, or thou shalt not escape!"
This Arcite, with full spiteful heart,
When he knew him, and had heard his tale,
As fierce as a lion pulled out his sword,
And said thus: "By God who sits above,
Were it not that thou art sick and mad for love,
And also because thou hast no weapon in this place,
Thou shouldest never walk out of this grove,
Rather thou shouldest die of my hand. 
For I repudiate the pledge and the bond
Which thou sayest that I have made to thee.
Lo! True fool, think well that love is free,
And I will love her in spite of all thy might!
But for as much as thou art a worthy knight
And desire to decide the right to her by battle,
Have here my pledge; tomorrow I will not fail,
Without the knowledge of any other person,
But here I will be found as a knight,
And bring armor right enough for thee;
And choose the best, and leave the worst for me.
And food and drink this night will I bring
Enough for thee, and bed-clothes for thy bedding.
And if it so be that thou win my lady,
And slay me in this wood where I am in,
Thou mayest well have thy lady as far as I am concerned."
This Palamon answered, "I agree."
And thus they are departed until morning,
When each of them had laid his faith as a pledge.
O Cupid, devoid of all kindness to others!
O reign, that will have no partner with thee!
Full truly it is said that love nor lordship
Will not, willingly, have any partnership.
Arcite and Palamon well find that (to be true).
Arcite has ridden immediately into the town,
And on the morning, before it was day's light,
Very secretly he has prepared two sets of armor,
Both sufficient and suitable to decide
The battle in the field between them two;
And on his horse, alone as he was born,
He carries all the armor before him.
And in the grove, at time and place set,
This Arcite and this Palamon are met.
The color in their faces began to change;
Just as the hunters in the reign of Thrace,
He who stands at the gap in the forrest with a spear,
When the lion or the bear is hunted,
And hears him come rushing in the bushes,
And breaks both boughs and the leaves,
And thinks, "Here comes my mortal enemy!
Without fail, he must be dead, or I,
For either I must slay him at the gap,
Or he must slay me, if I suffer misfortune."
So fared they in changing colors of their faces,
When each of them knew the other.
There was no 'good day,' nor no salutations,
But straightway, without word or conversing,
Each one of them helped to arm the other
As friendly as if he were his own brother;
And after that, with sharp strong spears 
They thrust at each other a wonderfully long time.
Thou mightest suppose that this Palamon
In his fighting was a mad lion,
And Arcite was like a cruel tiger;
They began to smite like wild boars,
That froth at the mouth white as foam for mad anger. 
They fought up to the ankle in their blood.
And in this manner I leave them to remain fighting,
And forth I will tell you of Theseus.
The destiny, general minister,
That executes in the world everywhere
The providence that God has foreseen,
So strong it is that, though the world had sworn
The contrary of a thing by yes or no,
Yet sometimes it shall happen on one day
That happens not again in a thousand years. 
For certainly, our desires here,
Be it of war, or peace, or hate, or love,
All this is ruled by the foresight above.
I mean this now in regard to mighty Theseus,
Who is so desirous to hunt,
And especially at the large hart in May,
That in his bed there dawns for him no day
That he is not clad, and ready to ride
With huntsman and horn and hounds beside him.
For in his hunting he has such delight
That it is all his joy and desire
To be himself the large hart's slayer,
For next to Mars he now serves Diana.
The day was clear, as I have told before this,
And Theseus with all joy and bliss,
With his Ypolita, the faire queen,
And Emelye, clothed all in green,
On hunting they are ridden royally.
And to the grove that stood very close by,
In which there was a hart, so people told him,
Duke Theseus has held the straight way.
And directly to the glade he rides,
For through there the hart was accustomed to take his escape,
And (flee) over a brook, and so forth on his way.
This duke will have a run or two at him
With such hounds as he pleases to command.
And when this duke was come unto the glade,
He looks toward the sun, and immediately
He was aware of Arcite and Palamon,
Who fought as fiercely as if it were two wild boars.
The bright swords went to and fro
So hideously that with the weakest stroke
It seemed as if it would fell an oak.
But who they were, he knew nothing.
This duke smote his warhorse with his spurs,
And with a sudden leap he was between them two,
And pulled out a sword and cried, "Stop!
No more, on the penalty of the loss of your head!
By mighty Mars, he shall at once be dead
Who smites any stroke that I can see.
But tell me what sort of men you are,
Who are so bold as to fight here
Without judge or other officer,
As it would be in a properly conducted duel,"
This Palamon answered hastily
And said, "Sire, what more words are needed?
We have deserved the death, both of us two.
Two woeful wretches are we, two miserable people,
Who are burdened down by our own lives;
And as thou art a rightful lord and judge,
Give us neither mercy nor refuge,
But slay me first, by holy charity!
But slay my fellow also as well as me;
Or slay him first, for though thou little knowest it,
This is thy mortal foe, this is Arcite,
Who is banished from thy land on (pain of losing) his head,
For which he has deserved to be dead.
For this is he that came unto thy gate
And said that he was called  Philostrate.
Thus has he tricked thee for many years,
And thou hast made him thy chief squire;
And this is he that loves Emelye.
For since the day is come that I must dye,
I make plainly my confession
That I am that same woeful Palamon
That wickedly has broken (out of) thy prison.
I am thy mortal foe, and it is I
Who loves the beautiful Emelye so passionately 
That I will die at this moment in her sight.
Therefore I ask death and my judicial sentence;
But slay my fellow in the same way,
For we have both deserved to be slain."
This worthy duke answered at once in reply,
And said, "This is a brief (easy) decision. 
Your own mouth, by your confession,
Has condemned you, and I will pronounce it;
There is no deed to torture you with the cord.
You shall be dead, by mighty Mars the red!"
The queen at once, for true womanliness,
Began to weep, and so did Emelye,
And all the ladies in the company.
Great pity was it, as it seemed to them all,
That ever such a misfortune should occur,
For they were gentle men of high rank,
And this debate was for nothing but love;
And saw their bloody wounds wide and sore,
And all cried, both low ranking and high,
"Have mercy, Lord, upon all of us women!"
And they fall down on their bare knees 
And would have kissed his feet there where he stood;
Until at the last his mood was calmed,
For pity comes soon to a gentle heart.
And though he first for anger shook and trembled,
He has considered shortly, in brief,
The trespass of them both, and also the cause,
And although his anger reproached them for their guilt,
Yet in his reason he excused them both,
As thus: he thought well that every man
Will help himself in love, if he can,
And also deliver himself out of prison.
And also his heart had compassion
Of women, for they weep continually,
And in his gentle heart he thought straightway,
And softly to himself he said, "Fie
Upon a lord that will have no mercy,
But be a lion, both in word and deed,
To those who are in repentance and fear,
As well as to a proud, spiteful man
Who will persist in what he first began.
That lord has little sound judgment,
That in such cases knows no distinctions
But considers pride and humility equal."
And shortly, when his anger is thus gone,
He began to look up with bright eyes 
And spoke these same words all aloud:
"The god of love, ah, bless my soul!
How mighty and how great a lord is he!
Against his power there avail no obstacles.
He may be called a god for his miracles,
For he can make, as he pleases,
Of every heart whatever he wants to devise.
Lo here this Arcite and this Palamon,
Who freely were out of my prison,
And could have lived royally in Thebes,
And know I am their mortal enemy,
And that their death lies in my power also,
And yet has Love, despite anything they could do,
Brought them both hither to die.
Now look, is that not a great folly?
Who can be a fool unless he is in love?
Behold, for the sake of God who sits above,
See how they bleed! Are they not in fine condition?
Thus has their lord, the god of love, paid
Their wages and their fees for their service!
And yet they consider themselves very wise,
Those who serve love, whatever may happen.
But this is yet the best joke of all,
That she for whom they have this sport
Owes them as much gratitude for this as she owes me.
She knows no more of all this passionate business,
By God, than knows a cuckoo or a hare!
But all must be tried, hot or cold; 
A man must be a fool, either young or old --
I know it by my own experience very long ago,
For in my time I was a servant (of love).
And therefore, since I know of love's pain
And know how sorely it can afflict a man,
As one who has been often caught in its snare,
I wholly forgive you this trespass,
At the request of the queen, who kneels here,
And also of Emelye, my dear sister.
And you must both immediately swear unto me 
That you shall never more harm my country,
Nor make war upon me at any time,
But be my friends in all that you can.
I forgive you this trespass completely."
And they fairly and well swore to him (to do) his request,
And prayed him to be their lord and to have mercy ,
And he grants them his favor, and thus he said:
"To speak of royal lineage and riches,
Though she were a queen or a princess,
Each of you both is worthy, doubtless,
To wed when it is time; but none the less --
I speak for my sister Emelye,
For whom you have this strife and jealousy --
You know yourself she can not wed two
At once, though you were to fight for evermore,
That one of you, whether he likes it or not, 
He must go whistle in an ivy leaf;
This is to say, she can not now have both,
Although you be never so jealous nor so angry.
And therefore I put you in this situation,
That each of you shall have his destiny
As is ordained for him, and listen in what way;
Lo, hear what I shall arrange for your fate.
My will is this, for flat conclusion,
Without any arguing --
If this pleases you, take it for the best:
That each one of you shall go where he pleases
Freely, without ransom or resistance,
And fifty weeks from this day, more or less,
Each one of you shall bring a hundred knights
Armed up for the lists in all respects,
All ready to decide the right to her by battle.
And this I promise you without fail,
Upon my word, and as I am a knight,
That whichever of you both who has the power --
This is to say, that whether he or thou
Can with his hundred, as I spoke of now,
Slay his opponent, or drive him out of the lists ,
Then I shall give Emelye as wife
To whom Fortune gives so good a gift (to win the battle).
I shall make the lists in this place,
And as God may surely have pity on my soul
I shall be an impartial and true judge.
You shall make no other agreement with me,
(Save this:) that one of you must be dead or taken.
And if it seems to you that this is well said,
Say your opinion, and consider yourself satisfied.
This is your (destined) end and your conclusion."
Who but Palamon looks happy now?
Who springs up for joy but Arcite?
Who could tell, or who could describe in writing,
The joy that is made in the place
When Theseus has behaved so graciously?
But down on knees went every sort of person,
And thanked him with all their heart and might,
And especially the Thebans many times.
And thus with good hope and with happy heart
They take their leave, and homeward did they ride
To Thebes with his old wide walls.
