Know you not where there stands a little town
Which is called Bobbe-up-and-down,
Under the Blee, in Canterbury Way?
There began our Host to joke and play,
And said, "Sirs, what! Dun is in the mire!
Is there no man, for prayer nor for hire,
That will awake our fellow far behind us?
A thief might full easily rob and bind him.
See how he naps! See how, for cock's bones,
That he will soon fall from his horse!
Is that a cook of London, with bad luck (to him)?
Make him come forth, he knows his penance;
For he shall tell a tale, by my faith,
Although it be not worth a bundle of hay.
Awake, thou Cook," said he, "God give thee sorrow!
What ails thee to sleep in the morning?
Hast thou had fleas all night, or art thou drunk?
Or hast thou with some prostitute all night labored,
So that thou can not hold up thy head?"
This Cook, who was full pale and not at all red,
Said to our Host, "God bless my soul,
There is fallen on me such heaviness,
Know I not why, that I would rather sleep
Than  (have) the best gallon of wine in Cheapside."
"Well," said the Manciple, "if it may give relief
To thee, sir Cook, and be displeasing to no person,
Who rides here in this company,
And (providing) that our Host would (agree), of his courtesy,
I will for now excuse thee of thy tale.
For, in good faith, thy visage is full pale,
Thy eyes are dazed also, as it seems to me,
And, well I know, thy breath full sourly stinks:
That shows well thou art not in good health.
By me, certainly, thou shalt not be deceived.
See how he yawns, lo, this drunken fellow,
As though he would swallow us right away.
Keep thy mouth closed, man, by thy father's kin!
The devil of hell set his foot therein!
Thy cursed breath would infect us all.
Fie, stinking swine! Fie, may foul fortune thee befall!
Ah, take heed, sirs, of this lusty man.
Now, sweet sir, will you joust at the quintain? 
It seems to me you are in good shape for that!
I believe that you have drunk until you act like an ape,
And that is when men play with a straw."
And with this speech the Cook became angry and enraged,
And on the Manciple he began to shake his head fast
For lack of speech, and down the horse him threw,
Where he lay, until men lifted him up.
This was a fine feat of horsemanship by a cook!
Alas, he had not kept himself by his ladle (i.e., stayed home)!
And before he was again in his saddle,
There was great shoving both to and fro
To lift him up, and much care and woe,
So unwieldy was this sorry enfeebled soul.
And to the Manciple then spoke our Host:
"Because drink has domination
Upon this man, by my salvation,
I believe he would tell his tale badly.
For, were it wine or old or new ale
That he has drunk, he speaks in his nose,
And sneezes fast, and also he has a head cold.
"He has also more than enough to do 
To keep him and his horse out of the mud;
And if he fall from his horse again,
Then shall we all have enough to do
In lifting up his heavy drunken body.
Tell on thy tale; of him I take no account.
"But yet, Manciple, in faith thou art too foolish,
Thus openly to reprove him of his vice.
Another day he would, perhaps,
Recall thee and bring thee to the lure (like a hawk);
I mean, he would speak of small things,
As for to find fault with thy accounts,
That may not be honest, if it comes to proof."  
"No," said the Manciple, "that would be a great mischief!
In that way he could easily bring me into the trap.
Yet I would rather pay for the mare
That he rides on, than he should strive with me.
I will not anger him, as I may thrive!
That which I spoke, I said it in my joking.
And do you know what? I have here in a gourd
A draught of wine, yes, of a ripe grape,
And right away you shall see a good joke.
This Cook shall drink thereof, if I may.
Upon pain of death, he will not say me nay."
And certainly, to tell it as it was,
Of this vessel the Cook drank fast, alas!
Why did he need that? He drank enough before.
And when he had blown in this horn,
To the Manciple he gave the gourd again;
And of that drink the Cook was wonderfully pleased,
And thanked him in such a way as he could.
Then began our Host to laugh wonderfully loud,
And said, "I see well it is necessary,
Wherever we go, to carry good drink with us;
For that will turn rancor and strife
To accord and love, and appease many a wrong.
"O Bacchus, blessed be thy name,
Who so can turn earnest into game!
Worship and thanks be to thy deity!
Of that matter you get no more of me.
Tell on thy tale, Manciple, I thee pray."
"Well, sir," said he, "now hearken what I say."
When Phoebus dwelled down here in this earth,
As old books make mention,
He was the most lusty bachelor
In all this world, and also the best archer.
He slew Phitoun, the serpent, as he lay
Sleeping in the sun upon a day;
And many another noble worthy deed
He wrought with his bow, as men may read.
He could play on every minstrelsy,
And sing so that it was a pleasure
To hear of his clear voice the sound.
Certainly the king of Thebes, Amphioun,
Who with his singing walled that city,
Could never sing half so well as he.  
Thereto he was the best looking man
That is or was since the world began.
What needs it his features to describe?
For in this world was no one so handsome alive.
He was therewith filled full of nobility,
Of honor, and of perfect worthiness.
This Phoebus, which was the flower of knighthood,
As well in generosity as in chivalry,
For his amusement, in sign also of victory
Over Phitoun, as tells us the story,
Was accustomed to bear in his hand a bow.
Now had this Phoebus in his house a crow
Which in a cage he fostered many a day,
And taught it to speak, as men teach a jay.
White was this crow as is a snow-white swan,
And imitate the speech of every man
He could, when he should tell a tale.
Therewith in all this world no nightingale
Could not, by a hundred thousand times,
Sing so wonderfully merrily and well.
Now had this Phoebus in his house a woman
Whom he loved more than his life,
And night and day did ever his efforts
To please her and do her reverence,
Save only, if I shall say the truth,
Jealous he was, and would eagerly have kept her.
For he was loath to be tricked,
And so is every person in such a situation;
But all in vain, for it does not help.
A good wife, who is clean of deed and thought,
Should not be constantly watched, certainly;
And truly the labor is in vain
To keep a shrew, for it will not be.
This hold I for a real act of folly,
To waste labor guarding wives:
Thus wrote old clerks in their time.
But now to purpose, as I first began:
This worthy Phoebus does all that he can
To please her, supposing for such pleasing actions,
And for his manly qualities and his behavior,
That no man should have put him out of her grace.
But God knows it, there can no man embrace
And restrain a thing which nature
Has naturally set in a creature.
Take any bird, and put it in a cage,
And give all thy attention and take thy pains
To foster it tenderly with food and drink
Of all dainties that thou can imagine,
And keep it as cleanly as thou can,
Although his cage of gold be never so gay,
Yet would this bird, by twenty thousand times,
Rather in a forest that is rude and cold
Go eat worms and such wretched food.
For ever this bird will work diligently
To escape out of his cage, if he can.
His liberty this bird desires always.
Let's take a cat, and foster him well with milk
And tender meat, and make his couch of silk,
And let him see a mouse go by the wall,
Right then he refuses milk and meat and all,
And every dainty that is in that house,
Such appetite has he to eat a mouse.
Lo, here has lust his domination,
And appetite drives away discretion.
A she-wolf has also an evil nature.
The most crude wolf that she can find,
Or least of reputation, will she take,
In time when she lusts to have a mate.
All these examples I about speak these men
That are untrue, and nothing about women.
For men have ever a lecherous appetite
On lower things to perform their delight
Than on their wives, be they never so fair,
Nor never so true, nor so gracious.
Flesh is so fond of novelty, curses on it,    
That we can not take pleasure in anything 
That is consonant with virtue for any length of time.
This Phoebus, who thought upon no guile,
Deceived was, despite all his attractive qualities.
For under him another had she,
A man of little reputation,
Worth nothing in comparison to Phoebus.
The more harm is, it happens often so,
Of which there comes much harm and woe.
And so befell, when Phoebus was absent,
His wife immediately has for her sweetheart sent.
Her sweetheart? Certes, this is a knavish speech!
Forgive it me, and that I you beseech.
The wise Plato says, as you may read,
The word must by necessity accord with the deed.
If men shall tell a thing properly,
The word must be cousin to the deed.
I am an unlearned man, right thus say I:
There is no difference, truly,
Between a wife that is of high degree,
If of her body dishonest she bee,
And a poor wench, other than this --
If it so be they work both amiss --
Except that the gentle, higher in rank,
She shall be called his lady, as in love;
And because that other is a poor woman,
She shall be called his wench or his sweetie.
And, God it knows, my own dear brother,
Men lay that one as low as lies that other.
Right so between an usurping tyrant
And an outlaw or an arrant thief,
The same I say: there is no difference.
To Alexander was told this sentence,
That, because the tyrant is of greater might
By the size of his army to slay downright,
And burn house and home, and level everything,
Lo, therefore is he called a captain;
And because the outlaw has but a small group of followers,
And can not do as much harm as he,
Nor bring a country to such great mischief,
Men call him an outlaw or a thief.
But because I am not a learned man,
I will tell nothing of texts, never a bit;
I will go to my tale, as I began.
When Phoebus wife had sent for her leman,
Right away they satisfied all their reckless lust.
The white crow, that hanged always in the cage,
Beheld their work, and said never a word.
And when home was come Phoebus, the lord,
This crow sang "Cuckoo! Cuckoo! Cuckoo!"
"What, bird?" said Phoebus. "What song singest thou?
Were thou not accustomed so merrily to sing
That to my heart it was a rejoicing
To hear thy voice? Alas, what song is this?"
"By God," said he, "I sing not amiss.
Phoebus," said he, "for all thy worthiness,
For all thy beauty and thy nobility,
For all thy song and all thy music,
For all thy watching, thou hast been tricked
By one of little reputation,
Not worth, compared to thee, 
The value of a gnat, as I may thrive!
For on thy bed I saw him copulate with thy wife."
What more do you want? The crow immediately him told,
By clear evidence and by bold words,
How his wife had done her lechery,
To his great shame and to his great dishonor,
And told him repeatedly he saw it with his eyes.
This Phoebus began to turn away,
And thought his sorrowful heart would break in two.
His bow he bent, and set therein an arrow,
And in his ire his wife then has he slain.
This is the substance of it; there is no more to say;
For sorrow of which he broke his musical instruments,
Both harp, and lute, and cither, and psaltery;
And also he broke his arrows and his bow,
And after that thus spoke he to the crow:
"Traitor," said he, "with tongue of scorpion,
Thou hast me brought to my ruin;
Alas, that I was wrought! Why was I not dead?
O dear wife! O gem of delight!
Who were to me so stable and also so true,
Now liest thou dead, with face pale of hue,
Full guiltless, that dare I swear, indeed!
O rash hand, to do so foul a crime!
O troubled wit, O reckless anger,
That recklessly smites the guiltless!
O mistrust, full of false suspicion,
Where was thy wit and thy discretion?
O every man, beware of rashness!
Do not believe any thing without strong evidence.
Smite not too soon, before you know why,
And be advised well and soberly
Before you act in any way 
Upon your anger caused by suspicion.
Alas, a thousand folk has rash anger
Completely undone, and brought them in the mire.
Alas! For sorrow I will myself slay!"
And to the crow, "O false thief!" said he,
"I will pay thee back immediately (for) thy false tale.
Thou once sang like a nightingale;
Now shalt thou, false thief, give up thy song,
And also thy white feathers every one,
Nor never in all thy life shalt thou speak.
Thus shall men on a traitor be avenged;
Thou and thy offspring ever shall be black,
Nor never sweet noise shall you make,
But ever cry in anticipation of tempest and rain,
As a sign that through thee my wife is slain."
And to the crow he rushed, and that right away,
And pulled out his white feathers every one,
And made him black, and took away all his song,
And also his speech, and out the door slung him 
Unto the devil, to whom I commit him;
And because of this case all crows are black.
Gentlemen, by this example I you pray,
Beware, and take care what you say:
And tell never any man in your life
How another man has copulated with his wife;
He will hate you mortally, certainly.
Dan Salomon, as wise clerks say,
Teaches a man to guard his tongue well.
But, as I said, I am not learned.
But nonetheless, thus taught me my mother:
"My son, think on the crow, in God's name!
My son, hold well thy tongue, and keep thy friend.
A wicked tongue is worse than a fiend;
My son, from a fiend men can bless themselves.
My son, God of his endless goodness
Walled a tongue with teeth and lips also,
So that man should think about what he may speak.
My son, very often, for too much speech
Has many a man been ruined, as clerks teach,
But for little speech well considered
Is no man harmed, to speak generally.
My son, thy tongue thou should restrain
At all times, but when thou make an effort
To speak of God, in honor and prayer.
The first virtue, son, if thou will learn,
Is to restrain and guard well thy tongue;
Thus learn children when they are young.
My son, of much ill-considered speaking,
Where less speaking had well enough sufficed,
Comes much harm; thus was me told and taught.
In much speech sin is not lacking.
Knowest thou what a rash tongue serves for?
Right as a sword cuts and carves
An arm in two, my dear son, just so
A tongue cuts friendship all in two.
A tale-teller is to God abominable.
Read Salomon, so wise and honorable;
Read David in his psalms; read Seneca.
My son, speak not, but with thy head thou nod.
Act as if thou were deaf, if thou hear
A tale-teller speak of perilous matter.
The Fleming says, and learn it if thou please,
That little tale-telling causes much rest.
My son, if thou no wicked word hast said,
Thou need not dread to be betrayed;
But he who has spoken evil, I dare well say,
He can by no way call his word back.
Thing that is said is said, and forth it goes,
Though he repent, or be ever so unwilling (it be known).
He is his slave to whom he has said
A tale of which he is now very sorry.
My son, beware, and be no author new
Of tidings, whether they be false or true.
Wherever thou come, amongst high or low,
Hold well thy tongue and think upon the crow."
ALIGN=top></A></LEFT> Texts on this page prepared and maintained by L. D. Benson <A HREF="mailto:ldb@wjh.harvard.edu">(ldb@wjh.harvard.edu)</A> 
