"Weeping and wailing, grief and other sorrow
I know enough, on evenings and mornings,"
Said the Merchant, "and so do many others 
Who are wedded. I believe that it is so,
For well I know it fares so with me.
I have a wife, the worst that can be;
For though the fiend were married to her,
She would outmatch him, I dare well swear.
Why should I tell you in detail
Her high malice? She is a shrew in every way.
There is a long and large difference
Between Griselda's great patience
And the extreme cruelty of my wife 
Were I released (from marriage), so may I may prosper,
I would never again come in the snare.
We wedded men live in sorrow and care.
Try it whoso will, and he shall find
That I say truth, by Saint Thomas of India,
As for the greater part (majority) -- I say not all.
God prevent that it should so happen!
"A, good sir Host, I have been wedded 
These two months, and no more, by God;
And yet, I believe, he who all his life
Wifeless has been, though one would him stab
Unto the heart, could not in any way
Tell so much sorrow as I now here
Could tell of my wife's cursedness!"
"Now," said our Host, "Merchant, as God may you bless,
Since you know so much of that art
Full heartily I pray you tell us part."
"Gladly," said he, "but of my own sorrow,
For sorry heart, I can tell no more."
Once there was dwelling in Lombardy
A worthy knight, who was born in Pavia,
In which he lived in great prosperity;
And sixty years a wifeless man was he,
And followed always his bodily desire
On women, where was his appetite,
As do these fools that are secular.
And when he was passed sixty years,
Were it for holiness or for dotage
I can not say, but such a great desire
Had this knight to be a wedded man
That day and night he does all he can
To discover where he might wedded be,
Praying our Lord to grant him that he
Might once know of that blissful life
That is between a husband and his wife,
And to live under that holy bond
With which God first bound man and woman.
"No other life," said he, "is worth a bean,
For wedlock is so easy and so pure,
That in this world it is a paradise."
Thus said this old knight, who was so wise.
And certainly, as truly as God is king,
To take a wife it is a glorious thing,
And especially when a man is old and white-haired;
Then is a wife the best part of his treasure.
Then should he take a young wife and a fair,
On which he might engender himself an heir,
And lead his life in joy and in pleasure,
Whereas these bachelors sing "alas,"
When they find any adversity
In love, which is nothing but childish vanity.
And truly it is fitting to be thus,
That bachelors have often pain and woe;
On brittle ground they build, and insecurity
They find when they expect security.
They live but as a bird or as a beast,
In liberty and under no restraint,
Whereas a wedded man in his estate
Lives a blissful and orderly life 
Bound under this yoke of marriage.
Well may his heart in joy and bliss abound,
For who can be so obedient as a wife?
Who is so true, and also so eager 
To care for him, sick and well, as is his mate?
For happiness or woe she will not forsake him;
She is not weary of loving and serving him,
Though he lie bedridden until he dies.
And yet some clerks say it is not so,
Of which that Theofrastus is one of those.
What does it matter though Theofrastus wants to lie?
"Take no wife," said he, "for managing the household,
As to economize in thy household expenditures.
A true servant does more diligence
To guard thy goods than thine own wife,
For she will claim half part all her life.
And if thou be sick, as God may save me,
Thy real friends, or a true servant,
Will take care of thee better than she that waits always
To inherit thy goods and has done so many a day.
And if thou take a wife unto thy household
Full easily canst thou be a cuckold."
This opinion, and a hundred things worse,
Writes this man, may God his bones curse!
But take no heed of all such foolishness;
Defy Theofrastus, and listen to me.
A wife is God's gift truly;
All other sorts of gifts certainly,
Such as lands, rents, pasture, or right to use common land,
Or personal possessions -- all are gifts of Fortune
That pass like a shadow upon a wall.
But doubt not, if I shall speak plainly:
A wife will last, and in thy house endure,
Well longer than thou will wish, indeed.
Marriage is a full great sacrament.
He who has no wife, I consider him ruined;
He lives helpless and all desolate --
I speak of folk in secular life.
And hearken why -- I say not this for nothing --
That woman is created for man's help.
The high God, when he had made Adam,
And saw him all alone, stark naked,
God of his great goodness said then,
"Let us now make a helper for this man
Like to himself"; and then he made him Eve.
Here can you see, and hereby can you prove,
That wife is man's help and his comfort,
His earthly paradise, and his source of consolation.
So obedient and so virtuous is she,
They must necessarily live in unity.
One flesh they are, and one flesh, as I guess,
Has but one heart, in prosperity and in distress.
A wife! A, Saint Mary, bless me!
How could a man have any adversity
That has a wife? Certainly, I can not say.
The bliss that is betwixt them two
There can no tongue tell, nor heart think.
If he be poor, she helps him to work;
She keeps his goods, and wastes not a bit;
All that her husband desires, well pleases her;
She says not once "nay," when he says "yea."
"Do this," says he; "All ready, sir," says she.
O blissful order of wedlock precious,
Thou art so merry, and also so virtuous,
And so commended and approved also
That every man that considers himself worth a leek
Upon his bare knees ought all his life
To thank his God that has sent him a wife,
Or else pray to God to send him 
A wife to last unto his life's end.
For then his life is set in security;
He may not be deceived, as I guess,
Providing that he work according to his wife's advice.
Then may he boldly bear up his head,
They are so true and therewithal so wise;
For which, if thou will act like a wise man,
Do always as women will advise thee.
Lo, how Jacob, as these clerks tell,
By good counsel of his mother Rebecca,
Bound the kid's skin about his neck,
For which his father's blessing he won.
Lo Judith, as the story also can tell,
By wise counsel she God's people kept,
And slew that Holofernes, while he slept.
Lo Abigail, by good counsel how she
Saved her husband Nabal when he
Should have been slain; and look, Esther also
By good counsel delivered out of woe
The people of God, and made that same Mordecai
To be exalted by Ahasuerus.
There is no thing superior (in degree of virtue),
As says Seneca, above a humble wife.
Submit to thy wife's tongue, as Cato bids;
She shall command, and thou shalt submit to it,
And yet she will (seem to) obey by way of courtesy.
A wife is keeper of thy household;
Well may the sick man bewail and weep,
Where there is no wife to keep the house.
I warn thee, if wisely thou wilt act,
Love well thy wife, as Christ loved his church.
If thou lovest thyself, thou lovest thy wife;
No man hates his flesh, but in his life
He nurtures it, and therefore I bid thee
Cherish thy wife, or thou shalt never prosper.
Husband and wife, however much men may jest or play,
Of worldly folk hold the secure way;
They are so knit together no harm can there befall,
And especially upon the wife's side.
For which this January, of whom I told,
Considered has, in his old age,
The pleasing life, the virtuous quiet,
That is in honey-sweet marriage,
And for his friends on a day he sent,
To tell them the substance of his intention.
With serious face his tale he has them told.
He said, "Friends, I am white-haired and old,
And almost, God knows, on my grave's brink;
Upon my soul somewhat must I think.
I have my body foolishly wasted;
Blessed be God that it shall be amended!
For I will be, certainly, a wedded man,
And that at once in all the haste I can (do it).
Unto some maid fair and tender of age,
I pray yow, prepare for my marriage
Right away, for I will not delay;
And I will attempt to discover, on my side,
To whom I may be wedded hastily.
But forasmuch as you are more than I,
You shall rather such a thing discover
Than I, and where it would be best to ally myself (marry).
"But one thing warn I you, my friends dear,
I will no old wife have in any way.
She shall not pass twenty years, certainly;
Old fish and young flesh would I gladly have.
Better is," said he, "a pike than a pickerel (young pike),
And better than old beef is the tender veal.
I want no woman thirty years of age;
It is but dry bean-stalks and coarse fodder.
And also these old widows, God it knows,
They know so much trickery on Wade's boat,
Do so much harm, when they please,
That with them should I never live in rest.
For various schools make clever clerks;
A woman of many schools is half a clerk.
But certainly, one can guide a young thing,
Just as one can mold warm wax with hands.
Therefore I tell you plainly, in brief,
I will no old wife have at all for this reason.
For if it so were that I had such bad luck
That I in her could have no pleasure,
Then I should lead my life in adultery
And go straight to the devil when I die.
Nor any children should I upon her beget;
Yet I would rather hounds had eaten me 
Than that my heritage should fall
In a stranger's hand, and this I tell you all.
I am not in my dotage; I know the cause why
One should wed, and furthermore know I
There speaks many a man of marriage
Who knows no more of it than my servant boy knows 
For which causes man should take a wife.
If he can not live his life chastely,
Let him take him a wife with great devotion,
For the sake of lawful procreation
Of children to the honor of God above,
And not only for sexual passion or love;
And so that they should abstain from lechery,
And yield their marital debt when it is due;
Or so that each of them should help the other
In distress, as a sister shall the brother,
And live in celibacy full piously.
But sirs, by your leave, that am not I.
For -- God be thanked! -- I dare make boast
I feel my limbs strong and sufficient
To do all that is proper to a man;
I know myself best what I can do.
Though I be white-haired, I fare as does a tree
That blossoms before the fruit is grown;
And a blossom-filled tree is neither dry nor dead.
I feel me nowhere white-haired but on my head;
My heart and all my limbs are as green
As laurel through the year is to be seen.
And since you have heard all my intention,
I pray you to my will you will assent."
Diverse men diversely him told
Of marriage many old examples.
Somme blamed it, some praised it, certainly,
But at the last, shortly to say,
As every day altercation occurs
Between friends in disputation,
There befell a strife betwixt his two brothers,
Of whom that one was called Placebo;
Justinus truly was called that other.
Placebo said, "O January, brother,
Full little need had you, my lord so dear,
To ask counsel of any that is here,
Except that you are so full of wisdom
That it does not please you, for your high prudence,
To deviate from the word of Solomon.
This word said he unto us every one:
`Do everything according to good advice,' thus said he,
`And then shalt thou not repent.'
But though Solomon spoke such a word,
My own dear brother and my lord,
As surely as God my soul may bring to rest,
I hold your own counsel is the best.
For, brother mine, of me take this advice:
I have now been a courtier all my life,
And God it knows, though I am unworthy,
I have stood in very high degree
Among lords of very high rank;
Yet had I never with any of them disagreement.
I never contradicted them, truly;
I know well that my lord knows more than I.
What he says, I consider it unshakably true;
I say the same, or else something similar.
A full great fool is any counselor
That serves any lord of high honor,
That dares presume, or else think it,
That his counsel should surpass his lord's judgment.
Nay, lords are no fools, by my faith!
You have yourselves showed here to-day
Such high good judgment, so piously and well,
That I consent and confirm every bit
All your words and your opinion.
By God, there is no man in all this town,
Nor in Italy, that could have spoken better!
Christ considers himself by this counsel very well pleased.
And truly, it is a bold act
By any man that is advanced in age
To take a young wife; by my father's kin,
Your heart hangs on a jolly pin (is very merry)!
Do now in this matter exactly as you please,
For finally I consider it for the best."
Justinus, that always still sat and listened,
Right in this manner he to Placebo answered:
"Now, brother mine, be patient, I pray,
Since you have spoken, and hear what I say.
Seneca, amongst other words wise,
Says that a man ought very carefully consider
To whom he gives his land or his moveable possessions.
And since I ought to consider very carefully
To whom I give my goods away from me,
Well much more I ought to consider
To whom I give my body for always.
I warn you well, it is no child's play
To take a wife without deliberation.
One must inquire -- this is my opinion --
Whether she be wise, or sober, or given to drink,
Or proud, or else otherwise a shrew,
A scold, or waster of thy goods,
Or rich, or poor, or else man-crazy.
Although it is so that no man shall find 
Any in this world that is perfect in everything,
No man, nor beast, such as men could imagine;
But nevertheless it ought enough suffice
With any wife, (to learn) if it so were that she had
More good personal qualities than her bad vices;
And all this requires leisure to find out.
For, God it knows, I have wept many a tear
Full privately, since I have had a wife.
Praise whosoever will a wedded man's life,
Certainly I find in it nothing but cost and care
And duties, of all blisses bare.
And yet, God knows, my neighbors about,
And especially many a crowd of women,
Say that I have the most steadfast wife,
And also the meekest one that bears life;
But I know best where my shoe pinches me.
You may, for me, do just as you like;
Consider -- you are a man of advanced age --
How that you enter into marriage,
And especially with a young wife and a fair.
By him that made water, earth, and air,
The youngest man that is in all this company
Is busy enough to bring it about
To have his wife alone. Trust me,
You shall not please her fully years three --
This is to say, to do her full pleasure.
A wife requires constant attention.
I pray you that you be not displeased."
"Well," said this January, "and hast thou spoken?
Straw for thy Seneca, and for thy proverbs!
I would not give a bread basket full of herbs
For academic talk. Wiser men than thou,
As thou hast heard, assented right now
To my purpose. Placebo, what say you?"
"I say it is a cursed man," said he,
"That hinders matrimony, certainly."
And with that word they rise immediately,
And are agreed fully that he should
Be wedded when he pleased and where he would.
Exaggerated imagination and constant thought
From day to day became fixed in the soul 
Of January concerning his marriage.
Many a fair shape and many a fair visage
There passes through his heart night after night,
As if one took a mirror, polished bright,
And set it in a common market-place,
Then should he see full many a figure pace
By his mirror; and in the same manner
Did January within his thought imagine
About maidens which dwelt nearby him.
He knew not on which he might settle.
For if that one have beauty in her face,
Another stands so in the people's good opinion
For her seriousness and her goodness
That of the people greatest praise has she;
And some were rich and had a bad reputation.
But nevertheless, between earnestness and joking (in every way),
He at the last decided upon one,
And let all others from his heart go,
And chose her by his own authority;
For love is blind always, and can not see.
And when he was in his bed brought,
He portrayed in his heart and in his thought
Her fresh beauty and her tender age,
Her small waist, her arms long and slender,
Her wise self-control, her nobility,
Her womanly bearing, and her seriousness.
And when he on her had decided,
He thought his choice could not be bettered.
For when he himself had decided,
He thought each other man's wit so bad
That it would be impossible to reply
Against his choice; this was his fantasy.
His friends sent he to, at his request,
And prayed them to do him that pleasure,
That hastily they would come to him;
He would abridge their labor, one and all.
He needs no more to travel about;
He had decided on whom he would settle.
Placebo came, and also his friends quickly,
And first of all he asked them all a favor,
That none of them make any arguments 
Against the purpose which he has taken,
Which purpose was pleasing to God, said he,
And true ground of his prosperity.
He said there was a maiden in the town,
Who for beauty had great renown,
Even though she was of low rank;
Her youth and her beauty are enough for him .
Which maid, he said, he would have as his wife,
To lead in ease and holiness his life;
And thanked God that he might have her entirely,
So that no one shall share his bliss.
And prayed them to labor in this need,
And arrange that he fail not to succeed;
For then, he said, his spirit was at ease.
"Then there is," said he, "nothing that can displease me,
Save one thing sticks in my conscience,
Which I will tell in your presence.
"I have," said he, "heard said, full long ago,
There can no man have perfect blisses two --
This is to say, in earth and also in heaven.
For though he keep him from the seven sins,
And also from every branch of that same tree (of sin),
Yet is there such perfect felicity
And such great ease and pleasure in marriage
That ever I am frightened now in my old age
That I shall lead now so merry a life,
So pleasing, without woe and strife,
That I shall have my heaven here in earth.
For since that true heaven is bought so dear
With tribulation and great penance,
How should I then, who live in such pleasure
As all wedded men do with her wives,
Come to the bliss where Christ eternally lives?
This is my dread, and you, my brethren two,
Resolve this problem, I pray."
Justinus, who hated his folly,
Answered straight away in his mockery;
And because he would his long tale abridge,
He would cite no authority,
But said, "Sir, providing there be no obstacle
Other than this, God by his high miracle
And of his mercy may so for you work
That, before you have your rite of holy church (last sacrament),
You may repent of the wedded man's life,
In which you say there is no woe nor strife.
And else, God forbid that he should not send
A wedded man grace to repent himself 
Well more often than a single man!
And therefore, sir -- the best advice I know --
Despair you not, but have in your memory,
Perhaps she may be your purgatory!
She may be God's instrument and God's whip;
Then shall your soul up to heaven skip
Swifter than does an arrow out of a bow.
I hope to God, hereafter shall you know
That there is not so great felicity
In marriage, nor never more shall be,
That shall keep you from your salvation,
Providing that you use, as is proper and reasonable,
The pleasures of your wife moderately,
And that you please her not too amorously,
And that you keep yourself also from other sin.
My tale is done, for my wit is thin.
Be not afraid of this, my brother dear,
But let us wade out of this matter.
The Wife of Bath, if you have understood her,
Of marriage, which we have in hand,
Declared has full well in little space.
Now farewell. God have you in his grace."
And with this word this Justin and his brother
Have taken their leave, and each of them of other.
For when they saw that it must necessarily be,
They worked so, by sly and wise negotiation,
That she, this maiden who May was called,
As hastily as ever that she might
Shall wedded be unto this January.
I believe it would be too long to delay you,
If I told you of every legal document and bond
By which she was endowed with his land,
Or to hear of her rich array.
But finally the day is come
That to the church both are they went
To receive the holy sacrament (of marriage).
Forth comes the priest, with stole about his neck,
And commanded her to be like Sarah and Rebecca
In wisdom and in faithfulness of marriage;
And said his prayers, as is the usage,
And makes the sign of the cross over them, and prayed God should them bless,
And made all secure enough with holiness.
Thus are they wedded with solemnity,
And at the feast sits he and she
With other worthy folk upon the dais.
All full of joy and bliss is the palace,
And full of instruments and of foods,
The most delicious of all Italy.
Before them stood instruments of such sound
That Orpheus, nor Amphioun of Thebes,
Made never such a melody.
At every course then came loud minstrelsy
That never trumpeted Joab to be heard,
Nor that Theodomas, yet half so clear
At Thebes when the city was in danger.
Bacchus pours them the wine all around,
And Venus laughs upon every person,
For January had become her knight
And would test his spirit both 
In liberty, and also in marriage;
And with her torch in her hand about
Dances before the bride and all the company.
And certainly, I dare right well say this,
Hymen, that god of wedding is,
Saw never in his life so merry a wedded man.
Hold thou thy peace, thou poet Martianus Capella,
Who writes for us that same wedding merry
Of her, Philology, and him, Mercury,
And of the songs that the Muses sang!
Too small is both thy pen, and also thy tongue,
To describe this marriage.
When tender youth has wedded stooping age,
There is such mirth that it can not be written.
Try it yourself; then can you know
If I lie or not in this matter.
May, that sits with so benign a manner,
Her to behold it seemed an enchantment.
Queen Esther looked never with such an eye
On Ahasuerus, so meek a look has she.
I can not describe to you all her beauty.
But thus much of her beauty tell I can,
That she was like the bright morning of May,
Filled with all beauty and delight.
This January is ravished in a trance
At every time he looked on her face;
But in his heart he began to menace her 
That he that night in arms would her strain
Harder than ever Paris did Helen of Troy.
But nevertheless yet had he great pity
That that same night he must offend her,
And thought, "Alas! O tender creature,
Now would God you might well endure
All my desire, it is so sharp and keen!
I am afraid you shall not be able to endure it.
But God forbid that I did all my might!
Now would God that it were become night,
And that the night would last evermore.
I would that all this people were gone."
And finally he takes all possible pains,
As he best could, so far as good manners allowed, 
To hasten them from the dinner in subtle manner.
The time came that it was reasonable to rise;
And after that men dance and drink deeply,
And spiced cakes all about the house they passed,
And full of joy and bliss is every man --
All but a squire, called Damian,
Who carved before the knight full many a day.
He was so ravished on his lady May
That for the very pain he was nearly crazy.
Almost he fainted and swooned where he stood,
So sorely has Venus hurt him with her torch,
As she carried it dancing in her hand;
And to his bed he went hastily.
No more of him at this time speak I,
But there I let him weep enough and complain
Until fresh May will rue on his pain.
O perilous fire, that in the bedstraw breeds!
O enemy in one's household, that offers his service!
O servant traitor, false domestic servant,
Like to the sly untrue adder in one's bosom,
God protect us all from your acquaintance!
O January, drunk with pleasure
In marriage, see how thy Damian,
Thine own squire and thy servant from birth,
Intends to do thee villainy.
God grant thee thy foe in thy household to espy!
For in this world is no worse pestilence
Than a foe in thy household always in thy presence.
The sun has completed his daily journey;
No longer can its body sojourn
On the horizon, in that latitude.
Night with its mantle, that is dark and rude,
Did overspread the hemisphere about;
For which departed is this cheerful crowd
From January, with thanks on all sides.
Home to their houses cheerfully they ride,
Where they attend to their affairs as they pleased
And when they see their time, go to rest.
Soon after that, this hasty January
Would go to bed; he would no longer tarry.
He drinks mulled wine, claret, and strong white wine
With hot spices to increase his desire;
And many a very fine aphrodisiac has he,
Such as the cursed monk, Dan Constantine,
Has written in his book "Concerning Intercourse";
To eat them all he was not at all averse.
And to his private friends thus said he:
"For God's love, as soon as it can be done,
Have all this house emptied in courteous manner."
And they have done right as he will command.
Men drink and draw the curtain (dividing the room) straightway.
The bride was brought to bed as still as stone;
And when the bed was by the priest blessed,
Out of the chamber has every one gone,
And January has fast in arms taken
His fresh May, his paradise, his mate.
He lulls her; he kisses her full often;
With thick bristles of his beard rough,
Like to the skin of a shark, sharp as brier --
For he was all freshly shaved in his fashion --
He rubs her about her tender face,
And said thus, "Alas! I must do injury
To you, my spouse, and you greatly offend
Before the time comes that I will down descend.
But nevertheless, consider this," said he,
"There is no workman, whosoever he be,
That can work both well and hastily;
This will be done at leisure perfectly.
It does not matter how long we play;
In true wedlock we two are coupled,
And blessed be the yoke that we are in,
For in our acts we can do no sin.
A man can do no sin with his wife,
Nor hurt himself with his own knife,
For we have leave by the law to enjoy ourselves."
Thus labors he until the day dawned;
And then he takes a bit of bread soaked in fine claret,
And upright in his bed then sits he,
And after that he sang full loud and clear,
And kissed his wife, and acted lecherously.
He was frisky as a colt, full of wantonness,
And full of chatter as a spotted magpie.
The slack skin about his neck shakes
While he sang, so chants he and croaks.
But God knows what May thought in her heart,
When she saw him sitting up in his shirt,
In his night-cap, and with his lean neck;
She rates his playing not worth a bean.
Then said he thus, "My rest will I take;
Now day is come, I can no longer remain awake."
And down he laid his head and slept until nine.
And afterwards, when he saw his time,
Up rises January; but fresh May
Held her chamber until the fourth day,
As is the best usage of wives.
For every labor sometime must have rest,
Or else long can he not endure;
This is to say, no living creature,
Be it of fish, or bird, or beast, or man.
Now will I speak of woeful Damian,
That languishes for love, as you shall hear;
Therefore I speak to him in this manner:
I say, "O innocent Damian, alas!
Answer to my question, in this case.
How shalt thou to thy lady, fresh May,
Tell thy woe? She will always say nay.
Also if thou speak, she will thy woe reveal.
God be thy help! I can no better say."
This sick Damian in Venus' fire
So burns that he dies for desire,
For which he put his life at risk.
No longer could he in this way endure,
But secretly a writing set he borrowed,
And in a letter wrote he all his sorrow,
In the manner of a poetic lament or a song,
Unto his fair, fresh lady May;
And in a purse of silk which hung on his shirt
He has put it, and laid it at his heart.
The moon, that was at noon that same day
That January has wedded fresh May
In two degrees of Taurus, was into Cancer glided;
So long has May in her chamber abided,
As custom is unto these nobles all.
A bride shall not eat in the hall
Until four days, or three days at the least,
Are passed; then let her go to feast.
The fourth day completed from noon to noon,
When the high mass was done,
In hall this January and May sit,
As fresh as is the bright summer's day.
And so befell that this good man
Remembered this Damian,
And said, "Saint Mary! how can this be,
That Damian does not attend on me?
Is he always sick, or how can this happen?"
His squires, who stood there beside,
Excused him because of his sickness,
Which prevented him from doing his duties;
No other cause might make him tarry.
"I am sorry about that," said this January,
"He is a gentle squire, by my troth!
If he died, it would be a harm and a pity.
He is as wise, discreet, and as circumspect
As any man I know of his rank,
And moreover manly, and also willing to serve,
And to be a worthy man right able.
But after dinner, as soon as ever I can,
I will myself visit him, and also May,
To do him all the comfort that I can."
And for that word every man blessed him,
That of his goodness and his graciousness 
He would so comfort in sickness
His squire, for it was a gentle deed.
"My Lady," said this January, "take good heed,
At after-dinner you with all your women,
When you have been in chamber out of this hall,
That all you go see this Damian.
Cheer him up -- he is a gentle man;
And tell him that I will him visit,
When I have done nothing but rested myself a little;
And hurry yourself, for I will wait
Until you sleep fast by my side."
And with that word he began to him to call
A squire, that was master of ceremonies of his hall,
And told him certain things, what he wanted.
This fresh May has held straight her way
With all her women unto Damian.
Down by his bed's side sits she then,
Comforting him as graciously as she can.
This Damian, when he saw his opportunity,
In a secret way his purse and also his letter,
In which he had written his desire,
Has put into her hand, without (doing) more,
Save that he sighs wonderfully deep and sore,
And softly to her right thus said he:
"Mercy! And (I ask) that you not discover me,
For I am dead if this thing be known."
This purse has she within her bosom hidden
And went her way; you get no more from me.
But unto January come is she,
Who on his bed's side sits full softly.
He takes her, and kisses her full often,
And laid him down to sleep, and that straightway.
She pretended that she must go
Where you know that every person must go by necessity;
And when she of this letter has taken heed,
She tore it all to pieces at the last,
And in the privy softly threw it.
Who is perplexed now but fair fresh May?
Down by old January she lay,
Who slept until the cough has him awaked.
Straightway he prayed her to strip herself all naked;
He would of her, he said, have some pleasure;
He said her clothes got in his way,
And she obeys, whether she wants to or not.
But lest that prudish folk be with me wroth,
How he worked, I dare not tell to you,
Or whether she thought it paradise or hell.
But here I let them work in their way
Until bell for evening prayers rang and they had to arise.
Were it by destiny or by chance,
Were it by astronomical influence or by nature,
Or configuration of the stars, that in such a state
The heaven stood that time that it fortunate
Was to present a petition concerning Venus' works --
For every thing has time, as say these clerks --
To any woman to get her love,
I can not say; but great God above,
That knows that no act is without cause,
May he judge of all, for I will hold my peace.
But truth is this, how this fresh May
Has taken such impression that day
Of pity for this sick Damian
That from her heart she can not drive
The thought to comfort him.
"Certainly," thought she, "whomever this thing may displease
I care not, for here I him assure
To love him best of any creature,
Though he had no more than his shirt."
Lo, pity runs soon in gentle heart!
Here can you see what excellent generosity
In women is, when they carefully deliberate a matter.
Some tyrant is, as there be many a one
Who has a heart as hard as any stone,
Who would have let him die in the place
Well rather than have granted him her grace,
And rejoice in her cruel pride,
And care not to be a homicide.
This gentle May, filled full of pity,
In her own hand a letter made she,
In which she grants him her true grace.
There lacks nothing but only day and place
Where she might satisfy his desires,
For it shall be right as he will devise.
And when she saw her time, upon one day
To visit this Damian goes May,
And craftily this letter down she thrust
Under his pillow; let him read it if he wishes.
She takes him by the hand and hard him squeezes
So secretly that no one knew of it,
And bade him be all healthy, and forth she went
To January, when he for her sent.
Up rises Damian the next morning;
All passed was his sickness and his sorrow.
He combs himself, he preens and neatens himself,
He does all that his lady desires and pleases,
And also to January he goes as humbly
As ever did a dog trained to hunt with an archer.
He is so pleasant unto every man
(For craft is all, whoever can do it)
That every one is eager to speak good of him,
And fully in his lady's favor he stood.
Thus leave I Damian going about his business,
And in my tale forth I will proceed.
Some clerks maintain that felicity
Consists of delight, and therefore certainly he,
This noble January, with all his might,
In a respectable manner, as is suitable to a knight,
Arranged for himself to live full voluptuously.
His lodging, his clothing, as suitably
To his degree was made as is a king's.
Amongst others of his suitable things,
He made a garden, walled all with stone;
So fair a garden know I anywhere none.
For, beyond doubt, I truly suppose
That he who wrote the Romance of the Rose
Could not the beauty of it well describe;
Nor Priapus could not be adequate,
Though he be god of gardens, to tell
The beauty of the garden and the well
That stood under a laurel always green.
Very often he, Pluto, and his queen,
Proserpine, and all their fairies,
Amused themselves and made melody
About that well, and danced, as men told.
This noble knight, this January the old,
Such pleasure has in it to walk and play,
That he will no one allow to bear the key
Save he himself; for of the small gate
He bore always of silver a latchkey,
With which, when he desired, he unlocked it.
And when he would pay his wife her marital debt
In summer season, thither would he go,
And May his wife, and no one but those two;
And things which that were not done abed,
He in the garden performed and accomplished them.
And in this way, many a merry day,
Lived this January and fresh May.
But worldly joy can not always endure
To January, nor to any creature.
O sudden chance! O thou Fortune unstable!
Similar to the scorpion so deceitful,
That flatter with thy head when thou wilt sting;
Thy tail is death, through thy poisoning.
O brittle joy! O sweet venom deceitful!
O monster, that so subtly can disguise
Thy gifts under appearance of steadfastness,
That thou deceivest both high and low (everyone)!
Why hast thou January thus deceived,
Thou who had received him for thy closest friend ?
And now thou hast deprived him of both his eyes,
For sorrow of which he desires to die.
Alas, this noble generous January,
Amid his pleasure and his prosperity,
Is grown blind, and that all suddenly.
He weeps and he wails pitifully;
And with all this the fire of jealousy,
Lest that his wife should fall in some folly,
So burned his heart that he sincerely wished 
That some man both her and him had slain.
For neither after his death nor in his life
Would he that she were neither lover nor wife,
But ever live as widow in clothes black,
Solitary as the turtledove that lost has her mate.
But at the last, after a month or two,
His sorrow abated, truth to say;
For when he knew it can not be otherwise,
He patiently accepted his adversity,
Except that, no doubt, he can not refrain
From being more jealous all the time;
Which jealousy was so excessive
That neither in hall, nor in any other house,
Nor in any other place, no longer,
He would suffer her to ride or walk,
Unless he had a hand always on her;
For which full often weeps fresh May,
Who loves Damian so graciously
That she must either die suddenly
Or else she must have him as she wishes.
She expects that her heart would burst.
Upon that other side Damian
Is become the most sorrowful man
That ever was, for neither night nor day
Could he speak one word to fresh May,
Regarding his purpose, of any such matter,
Without January's hearing it,
Who had a hand upon her always.
But nevertheless, by writing to and fro
And secret signs he knew what she meant,
And she knew also the aim of his plan.
O January, what might it thee avail,
Though thou could see as far as ships sail?
For it is as good to be deceived when blind
As to be deceived when a man can see.
Lo, Argus, who had a hundred eyes,
For all that ever he could peer or pry,
Yet was he deceived, and, God knows, so are others
That confidently suppose indeed that it is not so.
To overlook (trouble) is an advantage, I say no more.
This fresh May, whom I spoke of formerly,
In warm wax has made an impression of the latchkey 
That January carried of the small gate,
By which into his garden often he went;
And Damian, who knew all her plan,
The latchkey counterfeited secretly.
There is no more to say, but hastily
Some wonder by this latchkey shall betide,
Which you shall hear, if you will abide.
O noble Ovid, full truth sayest thou, God knows,
What trick is it, though (finding) it be long and painful,
That Love will not find it out in some manner?
By Pyramus and Thisbe can one learn;
Though they were kept full long strictly in every way,
They are agreed, whispering through a wall,
Where no one could have found such a trick.
But now to purpose: before eight days 
Were passed [of] the month of [June], it happened
That January has caught so great a desire,
Through incitement of his wife, to enjoy himself
In his garden, and no one (there) but those two,
That in a morning unto his May says he:
"Rise up, my wife, my love, my noble lady!
The turtle dove's voice is heard, my dove sweet;
The winter is gone with all his rains wet.
Come forth now, with thy dove-like eyes!
How fairer are thy breasts than is wine!
The garden is enclosed all about;
Come forth, my white spouse! Beyond doubt
Thou hast me wounded in my heart, O wife!
No blemish on thee knew I all my life.
Come forth, and let us take our pleasure;
I chose thee for my wife and my comfort."
Such old ignorant words used he.
To Damian a sign made she,
That he should go before with his latchkey.
This Damian then has opened the gate,
And in he hurried, and that in such a way
That no one could either see or hear it,
And quickly he sits still under a bush.
This January, as blind as is a stone,
With May in his hand, and no one else,
Into his fresh garden has gone,
And closed the gate quickly.
"Now wife," said he, "here is no one but thou and I,
That art the creature that I best love.
For by that Lord that sits in heaven above,
I had rather die on a knife
Than thee offend, true dear wife!
For God's sake, think how I thee chose,
Not for any greed, doubtless,
But only for the love I had to thee.
And although I be old and can not see,
Be to me true, and I will tell you why.
Three things, certainly, shall you win thereby:
First, love of Christ, and to yourself honor,
And all my heritage, town and tower;
I give it to you, draw up deeds as you please;
This shall be done to-morrow before sun goes to rest,
As God my soul may bring in bliss.
I pray you first, to seal the contract, you kiss me;
And though that I be jealous, blame me not.
You are so deeply imprinted in my thought
That, when I consider your beauty
And in addition to that the unsuitable old age of me,
I can not, certainly, though I should die,
Bear to be out of your company
For true love; this is without doubt.
Now kiss me, wife, and let us roam about."
This fresh May, when she these words heard,
Graciously to January answered,
But first of all she began to weep.
"I have," said she, "a soul to keep
As well as you, and also my honor,
And of my wifehood that same tender flower,
Which I have entrusted in your hand,
When the priest to you my body bound;
Wherefore I will answer in this manner,
By the leave of you, my lord so dear:
I pray to God that never dawn the day
That I do not die, as foully as woman can,
If ever I do unto my kin that shame,
Or else I damage so my name,
That I be false; and if I commit that offense,
Have me stripped and put me in a sack,
And in the next river have me drowned.
I am a gentle woman and no wench.
Why speak you thus? But men are always untrue,
And women have reproof of you always.
You have no other manner of behavior, I believe,
Except to speak to us of distrust and reproof."
And with that word she saw where Damian
Sat in the bush, and she began to cough,
And with her finger signs made she
That Damian should climb upon a tree
That loaded was with fruit, and up he went.
For truly he knew all her plan,
And every sign that she could make,
Well better than January, her own mate,
For in a letter she had told him all
Of this matter, what he must do.
And thus I let him sit upon the pear tree,
And January and May roaming merrily.
Bright was the day, and blue the firmament;
Phoebus has his streams of gold down sent
To gladden every flower with his warmness.
He was that time in Gemini, as I guess,
But little from his declination
Of Cancer, Jove's exaltation.
And it so befell, that bright morning-tide
That in that garden, in the further side,
Pluto, that is king of Fairyland,
And many a lady in his company,
Following his wife, the queen Proserpine,
Whom he kidnapped out of Etna
While she gathered flowers in the mead --
In Claudian you can read the stories,
How in his grisly chariot he fetched her --
This king of Fairyland then set himself down
Upon a bench made of pieces of turf, fresh and green,
And right away thus said he to his queen:
"My wife," said he, "there can no one say nay;
The experience so proves every day
The treasons which women do to man.
Ten hundred thousand [tales] I can tell
(That are) famous concerning your faithlessness and frailty.
O Solomon, wise, and richest of wealth,
Filled with wisdom and with worldly glory,
Full worthy are thy words to (keep in) memory
To every one that wit and reason knows.
Thus praises he yet the goodness of man:
`Amongst a thousand men yet found I one,
But of all women found I none.'
"Thus says the king that knows your wickedness.
And Jesus, son of Sirak, as I suppose,
Speaks reverence of you but seldom.
A wild fir and corrupt pestilence
Fall upon your bodies yet to-night!
See you not this honorable knight,
Because, alas, that he is blind and old,
His own man shall make him cuckold.
Lo, where he sits, the lecher, in the tree!
Now will I grant, of my majesty,
Unto this old, blind, worthy knight
That he shall have again his eyes' sight,
When his wife would do him villainy.
Then shall he know all her harlotry,
In reproof of both her and many others."
"You shall?" said Proserpine, "will you so?
Now by my mother's father's soul I swear
That I shall give her sufficient answer,
And all women afterwards, for her sake,
That, though they be in any guilt taken,
With bold face they shall themselves excuse,
And bear them down who would them accuse.
For lack of answer none of them shall die.
Although a man had seen a thing with both his eyes,
Yet shall we women face it out boldly,
And weep, and swear, and chide deceitfully,
So that you men shall be as ignorant as geese.
"What do I care for your authorities?
I know well that this Jew, this Solomon,
Found of us women many a fool.
But though he found no good woman,
Yet many another man has there found 
Women full true, full good, and virtuous.
Witness on them that dwell in Christ's house (heaven);
With martyrdom they proved their constancy.
The Roman histories also remind us
Of many a genuine, true wife also.
But, sir, be not angry, even though it be so,
Though he said he found no good woman,
I pray you take the meaning of the man;
He meant thus, that in perfect goodness
There is no one but God, neither man nor woman.
"Ah! by him who is the only true God,
Why make you so much of Solomon?
Why though he made a temple, God's house?
Why though he was rich and glorious?
So made he also a temple of false gods.
How might he do a thing that more forbidden is?
By God, however approvingly you gloss over his name,
He was a lecher and an idolater,
And in his old age he true God forsook;
And if God had not, as says the book,
Spared him for his father's sake, he should
Have lost his reign sooner than he would have wanted.
I reckon all the villainy
That you of women write not worth a butterfly!
I am a woman, I must necessarily speak,
Or else swell until my heart breaks.
For since he said that we are chatterers,
As ever whole I may enjoy my hair (remain alive),
I shall not cease, for any courtesy,
To speak harm of him that would do us dishonor."
"My Lady," said this Pluto, "be no longer angry;
I give it up! But since I swore my oath
That I would grant him his sight again,
My word shall stand, I warn you certainly.
I am a king; it is not proper for me to lie."
"And I," said she, "a queen of Fairy!
Her answer shall she have, I declare.
Let us have no more words concerning this;
For truly, I will no longer contradict you."
Now let us turn again to January,
That in the garden with his fair May
Sings full merrier than the parrot,
"You love I best, and shall, and none other."
So long about the garden paths is he gone,
Until he was come in front of that same pear tree
Where this Damian sits full merry
On high among the fresh leaves green.
This fresh May, who is so bright and sheen,
Began to sigh, and said, "Alas, my side!
Now sire," said she, "for whatever may happen,
I must have some of the pears that I see,
Or I must die, so sore I long
To eat some of the small green pears.
Help, for her love that is of heaven queen!
I tell you well, a woman in my condition
May have for fruit so great an appetite
That she may die but she have some of it."
"Alas," said he, "that I do not have here a servant boy
That could climb! Alas, alas," said he,
"For I am blind!" "Yea, sir, no matter," said she;
"But would you grant, for God's sake,
The pear tree within your arms to take,
For well I know that you mistrust me,
Then should I climb well enough," said she,
"If I my foot might set upon your back."
"Certainly," said he, "there shall be no lack,
(Even if) I might you help with my heart's blood."
He stoops down, and on his back she stood,
And caught her by a branch, and up she goes --
Ladies, I pray you that you be not angry;
I can not use circumlocutions, I am an unlearned man --
And suddenly at once this Damian
Pulled up the smock, and in he thrust.
And when Pluto saw this great wrong,
To January he gave again his sight,
And made him see as well as he ever could.
And when he had recovered his sight again,
There was never man of anything so happy,
But on his wife his thought was evermore.
Up to the tree he cast his eyes two,
And saw that Damian had treated his wife 
In such a manner it can not be expressed,
Unless I would speak crudely;
And up he gave a roaring and a cry,
As does the mother when the child shall die:
"Out! Help! Alas! Help!" he began to cry,
"O brazen crude lady, what dost thou?"
And she answered, "Sir, what ails you?
Have patience and reason in your mind.
I have helped you with both your eyes blind.
Upon peril of my soul, I shall not lie,
As I was taught, to heal with your eyes,
Was no thing better, to make you to see,
Than to struggle with a man upon a tree.
God knows, I did it in full good intent."
"Struggle?" said he, "Yea, indeed in it went!
God give you both a shameful death to die!
He screwed thee; I saw it with my eyes,
And else may I be hanged by the neck!"
"Then is," said she, "my medicine false;
For certainly, if you could see,
You would not say these words unto me.
You have some glimpse, and no perfect sight."
"I see," said he, "as well as ever I could,
Thanked be God! With both my eyes two,
And by my troth, it seemed to me he did thee so."
"You are dazed, dazed, good sir," said she;
"This thanks have I because I have made you see.
Alas," said she, "that ever I was so kind!"
"Now, lady," said he, "let all pass out of mind.
Come down, my dear, and if I have misspoken,
So God help me, I am very sorry.
But, by my father's soul, I thought to have seen
How this Damian had by thee laid,
And thy smock had lain upon his breast."
"Yea, sir," said she, "you may think as you please.
But, sir, a man that wakes out of his sleep,
He can not suddenly well take heed
Of a thing, nor see it perfectly,
Until he be fully awakened.
Right so a man that long has blind been,
Can not suddenly so well see,
First when his sight is newly come again,
As he that has a day or two been able to see.
Until your sight be settled a while
There may full many a sight deceive you.
Beware, I pray you, for by heaven's king,
Full many a man supposes to see a thing,
And it is entirely different than it seems.
He that misunderstands, he misjudges."
And with that word she leaped down from the tree.
This January, who is glad but he?
He kisses her and embraces her full often,
And on her womb he strokes her full softly,
And to his palace he has her led home.
Now, good men, I pray you to be glad.
Thus ends here my tale of January;
God bless us, and his mother Saint Mary!
"Ah! God's mercy!" said our Host then,
"Now such a wife I pray God keep me from!
Lo, what tricks and craftiness
Are in women! For always as busy as bees
Are they, us innocent men to deceive,
And from the truth ever will they deviate;
By this Merchant's tale it is well proven.
But doubtless, as true as any steel
I have a wife, though that she poor be,
But of her tongue, a blabbing shrew is she,
And yet she has a heap of other vices;
Thereof no matter! Let all such things go by.
But know you what? In secret be it said,
I sorely rue that I am unto her tied.
For if I should reckon every vice
Which she has, indeed I would be too foolish.
And the cause why? It should reported be
And told to her by some of this company --
By whom, it needs not to declare,
Since women know how to display such wares;
And also my wit suffices not concerning this
To tell all; therefore my tale is done."
