When ended was my tale of Melibee,
And of Prudence and her goodness,
Our Host said, "On my faith,
And by that precious body of Madrian,
(I swear that) I had rather than have a barrel of ale
That Goodelief, my wife, had heard this tale!
For she is in no way of such patience
As was this Melibeus' wife Prudence.
By God's bones, when I beat my knaves,
She brings me forth the great knobby clubs,
And cries, `Slay the dogs every one
And break them, both back and every bone!'
"And if any neighbor of mine
Will not in church bow to my wife,
Or be so bold as to offend her,
When she comes home she shakes her fists in my face,
And cries, `False coward, avenge thy wife!
By God's bones, I will have thy knife,
And thou shalt have my spinning staff and go spin!'
From daybreak to nightfall right thus she will begin.
`Alas,' she says, `that ever I was created
To wed a milksop, or a coward ape,
That will be browbeaten by every body!
Thou darest not defend thy wife's right!'
"This is my life, unless I will fight;
And out at door immediately I must hasten myself,
Or else I am as good as lost, unless I
Be like a wild lion, fool-hardy.
I know well some day she will make me slay 
Some neighbor, and then be on the run; 
For I am perilous with knife in hand,
Albeit that I dare not stand up to her,
For she is strong in fighting, by my faith:
That shall he find that does or says something amiss to her -- 
But let us pass away from this matter.
"My lord, the Monk," said he, "cheer up,
For you must tell a tale truly.
Lo, Rochester stands here near by!
Ride forth, my own lord, do not interrupt our game.
But, by my pledged word, I know not your name.
Which shall I call you -- my lord Don John,
Or Don Thomas, or else Don Albon?
Of what monastic order are you, by your father's kin?
I vow to God, thou hast a very handsome complexion;
It is a noble pasture where thou goest to eat.
Thou art not like a penitent or a ghost:
Upon my faith, thou art some officer,
Some worthy sexton, or some provisioner, 
For by my father's soul, according to my judgment,
Thou art a master when thou art at home;
No poor cloistered monk, nor no novice,
But a governor, wily and wise,
And, in addition to that, of muscles and of bones
A very handsome person indeed.
I pray to God, give him ruination
Who first brought thee unto the monastic life!
Thou wouldest have been a chicken-copulator indeed,
If thou haddest as much permission as thou hast power
To perform all thy desire in procreation,
Thou would have begotten very many a creature.
Alas, why wearest thou so wide a cope?
God give me sorrow, unless, if I were a pope,
Not only thou, but every mighty man,
Though he had a tonsure very prominently upon his head,
Should have a wife; for all the world is lost!
Religion has taken up all the best
At copulating, and we laymen are shrimps.
Of feeble trees there come weak offshoots.
This makes our heirs to be so scrawny
And feeble that they can not well beget children.
This makes it that our wives want to try out
Folk in holy orders, for you can better pay
Venus' payments than we can;
God knows, you pay with no inferior coins!
But be not angry, my lord, though I am joking.
Very often I have heard a truth said in jest!"
This worthy Monk took all in patience,
And said, "I will devote all my efforts,
So far as it is conducive to propriety,
To tell you a tale, or two, or three.
And if you desire to listen to me,
I will tell you the life of Saint Edward;
Or else, first, I will tell tragedies,
Of which I have a hundred in my cell.
Tragedy means a true narrative,
As old books make us remember,
Of one who stood in great prosperity,  
And is fallen out of high degree
Into misery, and ends wretchedly.
And ordinarily they are in verses
Of six feet, which men call hexameters.
Many are also composed in prose,
And also in meters of many and various sorts.
Lo, this explanation ought to suffice enough.
"Now hearken, if it pleases you to hear.
But first I beseech you in this matter,
Though I do not tell these things in chronological order,
Be it of popes, emperors, or kings,
According to their times, as men find written,
But tell some of them before and some behind,
As it now comes unto my memory,
Hold me excused for my ignorance."
I will bewail in the manner of tragedy
The harm of those who stood in high degree,
And fell so that there was no remedy
To bring them out of their adversity.
For certainly, when Fortune desires to flee,
No man can withstand her onward movement.
Let no man trust on blind prosperity;
Take warning from these examples true and old. <P>
At Lucifer, though he was an angel
And not a man, at him will I begin.
For though Fortune may harm no angel,
From high degree yet for his sin he fell 
Down into hell, in which he is yet.
O Lucifer, brightest of all angels,
Now art thou Sathanas, that mayst not depart
Out of misery, in which thou art fallen.
Lo Adam, in the field of Damascus
With God's own finger was he wrought,
And not begotten of man's unclean sperm,
And ruled all paradise save for one tree.
Had never worldly man so high degree
As Adam, until he for misconduct
Was driven out of his high prosperity
To labor, and to hell, and to ruin.
Lo Sampson, whose birth was announced
By the angel long before his nativity,
And was to God Almighty consecrated,
And stood in noble estate while he could see.
There was never such another as was he,
To speak of strength, and bravery as well;
But to his wives he told his secret,
Through which he slew himself for wretchedness.
Sampson, this noble almighty champion,
Without any weapon save his two hands,
He slew and tore all to pieces the lion,
(While he was) walking toward his wedding by the way.
His false wife could him so please and earnestly plead
Until she knew his secrets; and she, untrue,
Unto his foes his secrets did betray,
And abandoned him, and took another new lover.
Three hundred foxes Sampson took for ire,
And all their tails he tied together,
And set the foxes' tails all on fire,
For he on every tail had tied a torch;
And they burned all the grain crops in that land,
And all their olive trees, and vines also.
A thousand men he slew also with his hand,
And had no weapon but an ass's jawbone.
When they were slain, he was so thirsty that he
Was well nigh lost, for which he prayed
That God would on his pain have some pity
And send him drink, or else he must die;
And of this ass's jawbone, that was dry,
Out of a molar sprang right away a well,
Of which he drank enough, shortly to say;
Thus God helped him, as <i>The Book of Judges</i> can tell.
By sheer force at Gaza on one night,
Despite the Philistines of that city,
The gates of the town he has plucked up,
And on his back he has carried them
High on a hill where men could see them.
O noble, almighty Sampson, beloved and dear,
Had thou not told to women thy secret,
In all this world there had not been thy peer!
This Sampson never drank alcoholic drinks nor wine,
Nor on his head came any razor or scissors,
By command of the divine messenger,
For all his powers were in his hair.
And fully twenty winters, year by year,
He had the governance of Israel.
But soon shall he weep many a tear,
For women shall bring him to misfortune!
Unto his sweetheart Dalilah he told
That all his strength lay in his hair,
And falsely to his foemen she sold him.
And sleeping on her bosom upon one day,
She contrived to clip or shear his hair away,
And made his foemen know all his craft;
And when they found him in this condition,
They bound him securely and put out his eyes.
But before his hair was clipped or shaven,
There was no bond with which men could bind him;
But now is he in prison in a cave,
Where they made him grind at the mill.
O noble Sampson, strongest of mankind,
O formerly judge, in glory and in riches!
Now mayst thou weep with thy blind eyes,
Since thou from prosperity art fallen into wretchedness.
The end of this captive was as I shall say.
His foemen made a feast upon one day,
And made him as their fool play before them;
And this was in a temple of great magnificence.
But at the last he made a terrifying assault,
For he shook two pillars and made them fall,
And down fell temple and all, and there it lay --
And slew himself, and also all his foemen.
This is to say, every one of the princes,
And also three thousand bodies, were there slain
By the falling of the great temple of stone.
Of Sampson now I will say no more.
Beware by this example old and plain 
That no men tell their secrets to their wives
Of such things as they would earnestly keep secret,
If it concerns their limbs or their lives.
Of Hercules, the supreme conqueror,
His works sing his praise and high renown;
For in his time he was the flower of strength.
He slew and tore off the skin of the lion;
He laid down the boast of the Centaurs;
He slew the Harpies, the fierce cruel birds;
He seized the golden apples of the dragon;
He dragged Cerberus, the hound, out of Hell;
He slew the cruel tyrant Busirus
And made his horses eat him, flesh and bone;
He slew the fiery venomous serpent;
He broke one of Achelous' two horns;
And he slew Cacus in a cave of stone;
He slew the giant Antheus the strong;
He slew the grisly boar, and that very quickly;
And long bore the heaven on his neck.
Was never a person, since this world began,
That slew as many monsters as did he.
Throughout this wide world his name ran,
What for his strength and for his great goodness,
And he went to see every realm.
He was so strong that no man could prevent him.
At both ends of the world, says Trophee,
In stead of boundary markers he set a pillar.
This noble champion had a sweetheart,
Who was called Dianira, fresh as May;
And as these clerks make mention,
She has sent him a shirt, fresh and gay.
Alas, this shirt -- alas and woe oh woe! --
Was so skillfully envenomed indeed
That before he had worn it half a day
It made all his flesh fall from his bones.
But nonetheless some clerks excuse her
By one who was called Nessus, who made it.
However it may be, I will not accuse her;
But on his back all naked he wore this shirt
Until his flesh was blackened because of the venom.
And when he saw no other remedy,
He has himself covered over in hot coals,
For with no venom did he deign to die.
Thus died this worthy, mighty Hercules.
Lo, who can trust on Fortune for any time?
For he who follows (the ways of) all this dangerous world
Before he is aware is often laid very low.
Very wise is he who can know himself!
Be wary, for when Fortune wants to deceive,
Then she waits to overthrow her man 
By such a means as he would least suppose.
[Nebuchadnessar]
The mighty throne, the precious treasure,
The glorious scepter, and royal majesty
That had the king Nebuchadnessar
With tongue can hardly be described.
He twice won the city of Jerusalem;
The vessels of the temple he took with him.
At Babylon was his sovereign throne,
In which he had his glory and his delight.
The fairest children of the blood royal
Of Israel he had gelded indeed,
And made each of them to be his slave.
Among others Daniel was one,
Who was the wisest child of them all,
For he expounded the dreams of the king,
Whereas in Chaldea there was no clerk
Who knew what his dreams meant. 
This proud king had made a statue of gold,
Sixty cubits long and seven in breadth,
To which image both young and old
Commanded he to bow down, and hold in veneration,
Or in a furnace, full of red flames,
He who would not obey shall be burned.
But never would assent to (do) that deed
Daniel nor his two young fellows.
This king of kings was proud and arrogant;
He supposed that God, who sits in majesty,
Could not deprive him of his estate.
But suddenly he lost his high office,
And like a beast he seemed to be,
And ate hay like an ox, and lay outside
In rain; with wild beasts walked he
Until a certain number of years had passed.
And his hair grew to be like an eagle's feathers;
His nails were like a bird's claws;
Until God released him (after) a certain (number of) years,
And gave him back his wits, and then with many a tear
He thanked God, and always in his life in fear
Was he to do amiss or again trespass;
And until that time he was laid on his bier
He knew that God was full of might and grace.
<b>[Belshazzar]</b>
His son, who was called Belshazzar,
Who held the reign after his father's day,
He by (the example of) his father could not be warned,
For he was proud of heart and of behavior,
And also he was always an idolater.
His high estate made him confident in pride;
But Fortune cast him down, and there he lay,
And suddenly his reign began to break apart.
A feast he made for all his lords
Upon a time and bade them be happy;
And then his officers he did call:
"Go, bring forth the vessels," said he,
"Which my father in his flourishing time
Robbed out of the temple of Jerusalem;
And to our high gods we give thanks 
For the honor that our elders left with us."
His wife, his lords, and his concubines
Always drank, while their appetites lasted
Various wines out of these noble vessels.
And on a wall this king cast his eyes 
And saw a hand, armless, that wrote very fast,
For fear of which he quaked and sighed deeply.
This hand that so deeply terrified Belshazzar 
Wrote<i> Mane</i>, <i>techel</i>, <i>phare</i>s, and no more.
In all that land was no magician
Who could explain what this text meant;
But Daniel explained it right away,
And said, "King, God to thy father lent
Glory and honor, reign, treasure, income;
And he was proud and not at all dreaded God,
And therefore God sent great vengeance upon him,
And took away from him the reign that he had.
"He was cast out of man's company;
With asses was his habitation,
And ate hay as a beast in wet (weather) and dry
Until he knew, by grace and by reason,
That God of heaven has domination
Over every reign and every creature;
And then had God on him compassion,
And to him restored his reign and his bodily form.
"Also thou, who art his son, art proud also,
And knowest all these things truly,
And art rebel to God, and art his foe.
Thou drank also of his vessels boldly;
Thy wife also, and thy wenches, sinfully
Drank of the same vessels various wines;
And worship false gods cursedly;
Therefore to thee is ordained very great pain.
"This hand was sent from God that on the wall
Wrote <i>Mane</i>, <i>techel</i>, <i>pares</i>, trust me;
Thy reign is done; thou art of no account at all.
Broken up is thy kingdom, and it shall be
Given to Medes and to Persians," said he.
And that same night this king was slain,
And Darius occupies his throne,
Though for this he had neither right nor law.
Gentlemen, example may you take from this
How in lordship is no security,
For when Fortune will forsake a man,
She bears away his reign and his riches,
And also his friends, both high ranking and low.
For whatever man who has friends because of Fortune,
Misfortune will make them enemies, I believe;
This proverb is very true and very common.
[Zenobia]
Zenobia, of Palmyra queen,
As Persians write of her nobility,
So worthy was in arms and so fierce
That no person passed her in boldness,
Nor in lineage, nor in other noble traits.
Of the blood of kings of Persia is she descended.
I say not that she had most beauty,
But of her shape she could not be improved.
From her childhood I find that she fled
Duties of women, and to the woods she went,
And many a wild hart's blood she shed
With broad-headed arrows that she to them sent.
She was so swift that she quickly seized them;
And when she was older, she would kill
Lions, leopards, and bears all torn to pieces,
And in her arms handled them at her will.
She dared to seek wild beasts' dens,
And to run in the mountains all the night,
And to sleep under a bush, and she could also
Wrestle, by sheer force and sheer strength,
With any young man, were he never so strong.
There might no thing withstand her arms.
She kept her maidenhead from every person;
She disdained to be bound to no man.
But at the last her friends have married her
To Odenake, a prince of that country,
Although it was so that she long delayed them.
And you must understand that he
Had such fantasies as had she.
But nonetheless, when they were knit together,
They lived in joy and in felicity,
For each of them held the other beloved and dear,
Save one thing: that she would never assent,
In any way, that he should by her lie
But once, for it was her full intention
To have a child, the world to multiply;
And as soon as she could see
That she was not with child by means of that deed,
Then would she allow him to do his desires
Again, and only but once, no doubt.
And if she were with childe at that time,
No more should he play that same game
Until fully forty [weeks] were past;
Then would she once allow him to do the same.
Even if this Odenake were wild or tame,
He got no more of her, for thus she said:
It was to wives lechery and shame,
In any other case, if men had sexual relations with them. 
Two sons by this Odenake had she,
Whom she kept in virtue and learning.
But now unto our tale we turn.
I say, so worshipful a creature,
And wise also, and generous in moderation,
So assiduous in the war, and courtly also,
Nor more labor could in war endure,
Was none, though through all this world men should seek.
Her rich furnishings could not be told,
As well in utensils as in her clothing.
She was all clad in precious stones and in gold,
And also she did not neglect, for any hunting,
To have of various tongues full knowing,
When she had leisure; and to endeavor
To learn books was all her desire,
How she in virtue might spend her life.
And shortly of this history to treat,
So doughty was her husband and also she,
That they conquered many great realms
In the orient, with many a fair city
Belonging unto the majesty
Of Rome, and with strong hand held them very tightly,
Nor never could their foemen make them flee,
Always while Odenake's days lasted.
Their battles, whoever may wish to read them,
Against Shapur the king and many others,
And how all this business happened in actuality,  
Why she conquered and what legal claim she had to it,
And after, of her troubles and her woe,
How she was besieged and taken --
Let him unto my master Petrarch go,
Who wrote at length about this, I guarantee.
When Odenake was dead, she mightily
Defended the country, and with her own hand
Against her foes she fought so cruelly
That there was no king nor prince in all that land
That he was not glad, if he found such grace,
That she would not make war upon his land.
With her they made alliance by covenant 
To be in peace, and let her ride  about and enjoy herself.
The Emperor of Rome, Claudius
Nor, before him, the Roman Galien,
Dared never be so courageous
Nor any Armenian, nor any Egyptian,
Nor Syrian, nor any Arabian,
Within the field that dared fight with her,
Lest she would slay them with her hands,
Or with her troop put them to flight.
In kings' clothing went her two sons,
As heirs of all their father's reigns,
And Hermanno and Thymalao
Their names were, as Persians call them.
But always Fortune has bitterness in her honey;
This mighty queen can no longer endure.
Fortune out of her reign made her fall
To wretchedness and to misfortune.
Aurelian, when the governance
Of Rome came into his two hands,
He prepared to do vengeance upon this queen.
And with his legions he took his way
Toward Zenobia, and shortly to say,
He made her flee, and at the last seized her,
And put her in fetters, and also her two children,
And won the land, and home to Rome he went.
Amongst other things that he won,
Her chariot, that was wrought with gold and precious stones,
This great Roman, this Aurelian,
Has with him led, so that men should see it.
Before his triumphal procession she walks,
With gilded chains hanging on her neck.
Crowned was she, in accord with her rank,
And her clothing loaded full of precious stones.
Alas, Fortune! She that formerly was
Fearsome to kings and to emperors,
Now all the people stare on her, alas!
And she who wore helmets in violent battles
And won by force strong towns and towers,
Shall on her head now wear a woman's headdress;
And she that bore the scepter full of flowers
Shall bear a spinning staff, to pay for her living costs.
[Concerning Pedro King of Castille]
O noble, O worthy Pedro, glory of Spain,
Whom Fortune held so high in majesty,
Well ought men complain of thy piteous death!
Out of thy land thy brother made thee flee,
And after, at a siege, by trickery,
Thou were betrayed and led unto his tent,
Where he with his own hand slew thee,
Succeeding to thy reign and to thy income.
The field of snow, with the eagle of black therein,
Caught by the bird-lime on a rod colored like the burning coal,
He brewed this cursedness and all this sin.
The wicked nest was worker of this violent act.
Not Charlemagne's Oliver, who always took heed
Of truth and honor, but of Armorica
Ganelon-Oliver, corrupt for a bribe,
Brought this worthy king into such a plight.
[Concerning
O worthy Pierre, king of Cyprus, also,
Who won Alexandria by great strength,
To very many a heathen thou wroughtest great woe,
Of which thine own lieges had envy,
And for no thing but for thy chivalry
They in thy bed have slain thee in the morning.
Thus can Fortune govern and guide her wheel,
And out of joy bring men to sorrow.
[Concerning
Great Bernabo Viscounti of Milan,
God of delight and scourge of Lombardy,
Why should I not thy misfortune recount,
Since in rank thou had climbed so high?
Thy brother's son, who was thy double kinsman,
For he was thy nephew and son-in-law,
Within his prison made thee to die --
But why nor how thou were slain I know not.
[Concerning
Of the anguish of Earl Ugolino of Pisa 
There can no tongue tell for pity.
But a little way out of Pisa stands a tower,
In which tower in prison he was put,
And with him are his three little children;
The eldest was scarcely five years of age.
Alas, Fortune, it was great cruelty
To put such birds in such a cage!
He was damned to die in that prison,
For Roger, who was bishop of Pisa,
Had on him made a false accusation,
Through which the people did rise against him
And put him into prison in such manner
As you have heard, and meat and drink he had
So small that it just barely can suffice,
And in addition it was very poor and bad.
And on a day befell that in that hour
When his meal was accustomed to be brought,
The jailer shut the doors of the tower.
He heard it well, but he spoke absolutely nothing,
And in his heart straightway there fell a thought
That they for hunger would make him die.
"Alas!" said he, "Alas, that I was wrought!"
Therewith the tears fell from his eyes.
His young son, who was three years of age,
Unto him said, "Father, why do you weep?
When will the jailer bring our soup?
Is there no morsel of bread that you do keep?
I am so hungry that I can not sleep.
Now would God that I might sleep forever!
Then hunger should not creep in my belly;
There is nothing, but food, that I would rather have." 
Thus day by day this child began to cry,
Until in his father's bosom down it lay,
And said, "Farewell, father, I must die!"
And kissed his father, and died the same day.
And when the woeful father saw him dead,
For woe his two arms he began to bite,
And said, "Alas, Fortune, and woe oh woe!
I can blame thy false wheel for all my woe."
His children supposed that it was for hunger
That he gnawed on his arms, and not for woe,
And said, "Father, do not so, alas!
But rather eat the flesh upon us two.
Our flesh thou gave us, take our flesh from us,
And eat enough" -- right thus they to him said,
And after that, within a day or two,
They laid themselves down in his lap and died.
Himself, despaired, also for hunger died;
Thus ended is this mighty Earl of Pisa.
From high estate Fortune cut him away. 
Of this tragedy it ought enough suffice;
Whoever wants to hear it in a longer version,
Read the great poet of Italy
Who is called Dante, for he can all narrate
In great detail; not one word will he lack.
Although Nero was as vicious
As any fiend that lies very low down (in Hell),
Yet he, as Suetonius tells us,
Had this wide world in subjection,
Both east and west, [south], and north.
Of rubies, sapphires, and of white pearls
Were all his clothes embroidered from head to toe,
For he in gems greatly did delight.
More fond of luxury, more pompous in behavior,
More proud than he was never emperor;
That same clothing that he had worn one day,
After that time he wanted never to see it.
Nets of gold thread had he in great plenty
To fish in Tiber, when he wished to amuse himself.
His desires were all lawful in his legal code,
For Fortune as his friend would obey him.
He burned Rome for his pleasure;
The senators he slew upon one day
To hear how men would weep and cry;
And slew his brother, and by his sister lay.
His mother he put in piteous situation,
For he slit her womb to behold
Where he was conceived -- so woe oh woe  
That he reckoned so little of his mother!
No tear out of his eyes for that sight
Came, but he said, "A fair woman was she!"
Great wonder is how that he could or might
Be judge of her dead beauty.
He commanded that the wine be brought to him ,
And drank straightway -- no other mourning he made.
When might is joined unto cruelty,
Alas, too deep will the venom go!
In youth this emperor had a master
To teach him literature and courtesy,
For of morality he was the flower,
In his time, unless books lie;
And while this master had of him mastery,
He made him so cunning and so humble
That long time it was before tyranny
Or any vice dared unloose itself upon him.
This Seneca, of whom I tell,
Because Nero had of him such dread,
For he would always chastise him from vices 
Discreetly, as by word and not by deed --
"Sire," would he say, "an emperor must of necessity 
Be virtuous and hate tyranny --"
For which he in a bath made him to bleed
On both his arms, until he had to die.
This Nero had also the custom 
In youth to rise in the presence of his master ,
Which afterward seemed to him a greet grievance;
Therefore he made him die in this manner.
But nonetheless this Seneca the wise
Chose in a bath to die in this manner
Rather than have another form of torment;
And thus has Nero slain his dear master.
Now it happened that Fortune no longer desired
The high pride of Nero to cherish,
For though he may be strong, yet was she stronger.
She thought thus: "By God! I am too foolish
To set a man that is filled full of vice
In high degree, and call him emperor.
By God, out of his throne I will snatch him;
When he least expects it, the most quickly shall he fall."
The people rose upon him on one night
For his wickedness, and when he espied it,
Out of his doors right away he has hastened himself
Alone, and where he supposed to have been allied
He knocked fast, and always the more he cried
The tighter they shut all the doors.
Then he knew well, he had himself deluded,
And went his way; no longer dared he call.
The people cried and made a tumult up and down,
That with his ears he heard how they said,
"Where is this false tyrant, this Nero?"
For fear almost out of his wit he went,
And to his gods pitiably he prayed
For help, but it could not happen.
For dread of this it seemed to him that he died,
And he ran into a garden to hide himself.
And in this garden found he two churls 
That sat by a fire, great and red.
And to these two churls he did pray
To slay him and to strike off his head,
So that to his body, when he was deed,
No insult was done for his ill fame.
Himself he slew, he knew no better course of action,
About which Fortune laughed, and amused herself.
Was never captain under a king
That put more reigns in subjection,
Nor was stronger in all things concerning the field of battle,
In his time, nor greater of renown,
Nor more arrogant in high presumption
Than Holofernes, whom Fortune always kissed
So wantonly, and led him up and down
Until his head was off, before he knew it.
Not only that this world had him in awe
For (fear of) loss of riches or liberty,
But he made every man renounce his religion.
"Nebuchadnezzar was god," said he;
"No other god should be adored."
Against his command no person dared trespass,
Save in Bethulia, a strong city,
Where Eliachim (Joachim) was a priest of that place.
But take heed of the death of Holofernes:
Amid his host he lay drunk at night,
Within his tent, large as is a barn,
And yet, for all his pomp and all his might,
Judith, a woman, as he lay on his back
Sleeping, smote off his head, and from his tent
Very secretly she stole (away) from every person,
And with his head unto her town she went.
[Concerning
What needs it of king Antiochus
To tell his high royal majesty,
His high pride, his venomous deeds?
For such another was there no one like him.
Read who he was in Maccabees,
And read the proud words that he said,
And why he fell from high prosperity,
And on a hill how wretchedly he died.
Fortune had elevated him so in pride
That truly he supposed he might attain
Unto the stars upon every side,
And in a scales weigh each mountain,
And all the floods of the sea restrain.
And God's people had he most in hate;
Them he would slay in torment and in pain,
Supposing that God could not reduce his pride.
And because Nicanor and Timotheus
By Jews were vanquished completely,
Unto the Jews such a hate had he
That he ordered his chariot prepared very hastily,
And swore, and said very angrily 
Unto Jerusalem he would (go) immediately
To wreak his ire on it very cruelly;
But of his purpose he was prevented very soon.
God because of his threatening so sorely smote him
With invisible wound, ever incurable,
That in his guts it carved so and bit
That his pains were intolerable.
And certainly the punishment was reasonable,
For many a man's gut did he pain.
But from his cursed and damnable purpose,
For all his pain, he would not restrain himself,
But commanded straightway to prepare his host;
And suddenly, before he was aware of it,
God laid low all his pride and all his boast.
For he so sorely fell out of his throne
That it tore to pieces his limbs and his skin,
So that he might neither walk nor ride,
But in a sedan chair men carried him about,
All badly bruised, both back and side.
The vengeance of God smote him so cruelly
That through his body wicked worms crept,
And in addition to all that he stank so horribly
That no one of all his household that served him,
Whether he stayed awake or else slept,
Could not endure the stink of him.
In this affliction he wailed and also wept,
And acknowledged God lord of every creature.
To all his host and to himself also
Full loathsome was the stink of his decaying body;
No man could bear him in any way.
And in this stink and this horrible pain,
He died very wretchedly on a mountain.
Thus has this robber and this homicide,
That many a man made to weep and mourn,
Such reward as belongs to pride.
[Concerning
The history of Alexander is so commonly known
That every person who has good judgment
Has heard something or all of his fortune.
This wide world, in the end,
He won by strength, or for his high renown
They were glad to send unto him (to sue) for peace .
The pride of man and beast he laid low,
Wherever he came, unto the world's end.
Comparison might never yet be made
Between him and another conqueror;
For all this world for dread of him has trembled.
He was flower of knighthood and of nobility;
Fortune made him the heir of her honor.
Save wine and women, no thing might assuage 
His noble ambition in arms and struggles,
So was he full of leonine courage.
What honor were it to him, though I you told
Of Darius, and a hundred thousand more
Of kings, princes, dukes, earls bold
Whom he conquered, and brought them into woe?
I say, as far as man can ride or walk,
The world was his -- what more should I tell?
For though I should write or told you evermore
About his knighthood, it could not suffice.
Twelve years he reigned, as says <i>Maccabees</i>.
He was the son of Philip of Macedonia,
Who first was king in the country of Greece.
O worthy, noble Alexander, alas,
That ever should befall such a case!
Thou were poisoned by thine own folk;
Fortune has turned thy six [highest throw] into an ace [lowest],
And for thee she wept never a tear.
Who shall give me tears to complain
The death of nobility and of magnanimity,
Who all the world wielded in his control,
And yet it seemed to him it might not suffice?
So full was his disposition of high knightly prowess. 
Alas, who shall me help to indict
False Fortune, and to despise poison,
The which two for all this woe I blame?
[Concerning
By wisdom, manhood, and by great labor,
From humble bed to royal majesty
Up rose this Julius, the conqueror,
That won all the west by land and sea,
By strength of hand, or else by treaty,
And unto Rome made them tributary;
And afterwards of Rome the emperor was he
Until Fortune became his adversary.
O mighty Caesar, that in Thessaly
Against Pompey, thy father in law,
Who of the east had all the dominion by conquest
As far as where the day begins to dawn,
Thou through thy knighthood hast them taken and slain,
Save for a few folk that fled with Pompey,
Through which thou puttest all the east in awe.
Thank Fortune, that so well helped thee to succeed!
But now for a little while I will bewail
This Pompey, this noble governor
Of Rome, who fled at this battle.
I say, one of his men, a false traitor,
His head off smote, to win himself favor
Of Julius, and he brought him the head.
Alas, Pompey, of the east conqueror,
That Fortune unto such an end thee brought!
To Rome again repairs Julius
With his triumphal procession, very nobly crowned with laurel; 
But on a time Brutus Cassius,
Who ever had envy of his high estate,
Full secretly has made conspiracy
Against this Julius in a cunning manner,
And planned the place in which he should die
With daggers, as I shall tell you.
This Julius to the Capitol went
Upon one day, as he was accustomed to go,
And in the Capitol straightway seized him
This false Brutus and his other foes,
And stuck him with daggers straightway
With many a wound, and thus they let him lie;
But never groaned he at no stroke but one,
Or else at two, unless his history lies.
So manly was this Julius of heart,
And so well loved dignified decency,
That though his deadly wounds sorely pained,
His mantle over his hips cast he,
So that no man should see his private parts;
And as he lay a-dying in a trance,
And knew truly that he was dead,
Of decency yet had he remembrance.
Lucan, to thee this history I commend,
And to Suetonius, and to Valerius also,
That of this history wrote beginning and end,
How to these two great conquerors
Fortune was first friend, and afterwards foe.
Let no man trust upon her favor long,
But keep an eye on her for evermore;
Take note of all these conquerors strong.
This rich Croesus, once king of Lydia,
Of which Croesus Cyrus was sorely afraid, 
Yet was he caught amidst all his pride,
And to be burned men led him to the fire.
But such a rain down from the sky poured
That killed the fire, and allowed him to escape;
But to be wary (of Fortune) no grace yet he had,
Until Fortune on the gallows made him gape.
When he had escaped, he can not stop
Beginning a new war again.
He well believed, because Fortune sent him
Such luck that he escaped by means of the rain,
That of his foes he could not be slain;
And also a dream upon one night he dreamed,
Of which he was so proud and also so pleased
That in vengeance he set all his heart.
Upon a tree he was, as it seemed to him,
Where Jupiter washed him, both back and side,
And Phoebus also brought him a fair towel 
To dry himself with; and therefore his pride grew,
And to his daughter, who stood him beside,
Whom he knew to abound in good judgment,
He bad her tell him what it signified,
And she began right thus to expound his dream:
"The tree," said she, "is to signify the gallows,
And Jupiter betokens snow and rain,
And Phoebus, with his towel so clean,
Those are to say the sun beams.
Thou shalt be hanged, father, certainly;
Rain shall thee wash, and sun shall thee dry."
Thus warned him very bluntly and also very plainly
His daughter, who was called Phanye.
Hanged was Cresus, the proud king;
His royal throne could not help him.
Tragedies no other sort of thing
Can in singing cry nor bewail (anything)
But that Fortune always will assail
With unexpected stroke the reigns that are proud;
For when men trust her, then will she fail,
And cover her bright face with a cloud.
