Our Host saw well that the bright sun
The arc of his twelve-hour day has run
One fourth, and half an hour and more,
And though he was not far advanced in learning,
He knew it was the eighteenth day
Of April, that is messenger to May;
And saw well that the shadow of every tree
Was in length the same quantity
As was the erect body that caused it.
And therefore by the shadow he judged
That Phoebus, which shone so clear and bright,
Five and forty degrees had climbed on height,
And for that day, in that latitude,
It was ten o'clock, he did conclude,
And suddenly he pulled his horse about.
"Gentlemen," said he, "I warn you, all this company,
One fourth of this day is gone.
Now for the love of God and of Saint John,
Lose no time, insofar as you can.
Gentlemen, the time wastes away night and day,
And steals from us, in part imperceptibly when sleeping,
And in part through negligence when we are awake,
As does the stream that never turns back,
Descending from the mountain into the plain.
Well can Seneca and many a philosopher
Bewail time more than gold in coffer;
For `Loss of property may be recovered,
But loss of time ruins us,' said he.
It will not come again, without doubt,
No more than will Malkin's maidenhead,
When she has lost it in her wantonness.
Let us not grow moldy thus in idleness.
"Sir Man of Law," said he, "as you may have bliss,
Tell us a tale now, as was agreed.
You have submitted, through your free assent,
To stand in this case at my judgment.
Now fulfill your promise;
Then have you done your duty at the least."
"Host," said he, "in God's name, I assent;
To break our agreement is not my intent.
Promise is debt, and I will eagerly keep
All my promise, I can say no better.
For such law as a man gives another person,
He should himself use it, by right;
Thus our text will have it. But nonetheless, certainly,
Right now I can tell no suitable tale
That Chaucer, though he is ignorant
Of meters and of riming craftily,
Has (not already) said them in such English as he knows 
Long ago, as knows many a man;
And if he has not said them, dear brother,
In one book, he has said them in another.
For he has told of lovers up and down
More than Ovid made mention of 
In his Epistles, that are very old.
Why should I tell them, since they have been told?
"In youth he wrote about Ceyx and Alcion,
And since has he spoken of each one,
These noble wives and these lovers also.
Whoever will seek his large volume,
Called the Saints' Legend of Cupid,
There may he see the large wounds wide
Of Lucretia, and Thisbe of Babylon;
The sword of Dido (used) because of the false Aeneas;
The tree of Phyllis for her Demophon;
The complaint of Deianire and of Hermione,
Of Ariadne, and of Hypsipyle  --
The barren isle standing in the sea --
The drowned Leander for his Hero;
The tears of Helen, and also the woe
Of Briseis, and of thee, Laodamia;
The cruelty of thee, queen Medea,
Thy little children hanging by the neck,
Because of thy Jason, that was in love so false!
O Hypermnestra, Penelope, Alcestis,
Your wifehood he commends with the best!
"But certainly no word writes he
Of that wicked example of Canace,
Who loved her own brother sinfully --
Of such cursed stories I say fie! --
Or else of Apollonius of Tyre,
How that the cursed king Antiochus
Deprived his daughter of her maidenhead,
That is so horrible a tale to read,
When he threw her upon the pavement.
And therefore he, after careful consideration
Would never write in any of his compositions
Of such unnatural abominations,
Nor will I tell any such, if that I may.
"But of my tale what shall I do this day?
I would hate to be likened, doubtless,
To the Muses that men call Pierides --
Metamorphoses shows what I mean;
But nonetheless, I reckon it not worth a bean
Though I come after him with a humble dish.
I speak in prose, and let him make rhymes."
And with that word he, with a solemn demeanor,
Began his tale, as you shall after hear.
O hateful harm, condition of poverty!
By thirst, by cold, by hunger so distressed!
To ask help thou art ashamed in thy heart;
If thou ask for none, thou art so wounded by need 
That true need reveals all thy hidden wound!
Despite all you can do, thou must for indigence
Either steal, or beg, or borrow thy living expenses!
Thou blamest Christ and sayest full bitterly
He wrongly allots temporal riches;
Thy neighbor thou blamest sinfully,
And sayest thou hast too little and he has all.
"By my faith," sayest thou, "sometimes he shall pay for it,
When his tail shall burn in the live coals,
For he helps not the needy in their need."
Listen to what is the opinion of the wise:
"Better it is to die than to have poverty";
"Thy very neighbor will despise thee."
If thou be poor, farewell thy reverence!
Yet of the wise man take this advice:
"All the days of poor men are painful."
Beware, therefore, before thou come to that point!
If thou be poor, thy brother hates thee,
And all thy friends flee from thee, alas!
O rich merchants, full of prosperity are you,
O noble, o prudent folk, in such a case as this!
Your bags are not filled with double aces (a losing throw in dice),
But with six five, that is your winning number;
At Christmas merrily may you dance!
You seek land and sea for your winnings;
As wise folk you know all the condition
Of (foreign) lands; you are fathers of tidings
And tales, both of peace and of war.
I would right now be without any tales,
Were it not that a merchant, gone by is many a year,
Taught me a tale, which you shall hear.
In Syria once dwelt a company
Of rich merchants, and moreover trustworthy and true,
That wherever they sent their oriental goods,
Cloth of gold, and satins rich in color.
Their merchandise was so serviceable and so novel
That every person has desire to trade
With them, and also to sell them their goods.
Now it happened that the masters of that company
Have prepared themselves to travel to Rome;
Were it for business or for pleasure,
No other messenger would they thither send,
But came themselves to Rome; this is the sum of it.
And in such a place as they thought advantageous
For their purposes, they take their lodging.
These merchants have sojourned in that town
A certain length of time, as accorded with their desires.
And it so happened that the excellent renown
Of the Emperor's daughter, Lady Custance,
Was reported, in full detail,
Unto these Syrian merchants in such a manner,
From day to day, as I shall tell you.
This was the common opinion of every man:
"Our Emperor of Rome -- may God look after him! --
A daughter has that, since the world began,
To consider as well her goodness as beauty,
There was never such another as is she.
I pray to God to sustain her in honor,
And would she were of all Europe the queen.
"In her is great beauty, without pride,
Youth, without immaturity or folly;
In all her deeds virtue is her guide;
Humility has slain in her all tyranny.
She is mirror of all courtesy;
Her heart is a true chamber of holiness,
Her hand, minister of generosity in giving alms."
And all this opinion was true, as God is true.
But now to the point let us turn again.
These merchants have had their ships newly loaded,
And when they have this blissful maiden seen,
Home to Syria they have gone very happily,
And they conduct their business as they have done for years,
And live in prosperity; I can tell you no more.
Now it happened that these merchants stood in the good graces
Of him that was the Sultan of Syria;
For when they came from any foreign place,
He would, of his gracious courtesy,
Entertain them well, and busily seek out
News from various countries, to learn
The wonders that they could have seen or heard.
Amongst other things, specially,
These merchants have told him of Lady Custance 
Such great noble qualities in earnest, in detail,
That this Sultan has caught such great desire
To have her figure in his remembrance,
That all his desire and all his intense concern
Was to love her while his life may endure.
Perhaps in that large book
Which men call the heaven was written 
In stars, when he was born,
That he because of love should have his death, alas!
For in the stars, clearer than is glass,
Is written, God knows, whoever could read it,
The death of every man, without doubt.
In stars, many a winter before then,
Was written the death of Hector, Achilles,
Of Pompey, Julius, before they were born;
The strife of Thebes; and of Hercules,
Of Sampson, Turnus, and of Socrates
The death; but men's wits are so dull
That no person can well interpret it fully.
This Sultan for his privy council sent,
And, to pass briefly over this matter,
He has to them declared his intent,
And said to them, certainly, unless he could have the good fortune
To have Custance within a little time,
He was as good as dead; and ordered them hastily
To arrange some remedy to save his life .
Different men said different things;
They argue, consider alternatives;
Many a subtle argument they laid forth;
They speak of magic and deception.
But finally, in conclusion,
They can not see any advantage in that,
Nor in any other way, save for marriage.
Then saw they in that such difficulty
By way of reason, to speak all plainly, 
Because there was such difference
Between their two religions, that they say
They suppose that no "Christian prince would be willing
To wed his child under our sweet religion
That was taught us by Mohammed, our prophet."
And he answered, "Rather than I lose
Custance, I will be christened, doubtless.
I must be hers; I can choose no other.
I pray you to keep your arguments silent;  
Save my life, and be not negligent 
To get her who has my life in her keeping,
For in this woe I can not long endure."
What needs greater increase of words?
I say, by treaty and negotiation,
And by the pope's mediation,
And all the church, and all the knights,
That for the destruction of idolatry,
And for the increase of Christ's dear law,
They are agreed, as you shall hear:
That the Sultan and his baronage
And all his vassals should christened be,
And he shall have Custance in marriage,
And a certain amount of gold, I do not know how much;
And for this provided sufficient pledges.
This same agreement was sworn on either side;
Now, fair Custance, almighty God thee guide!
Now would some men expect, as I guess,
That I should tell all the preparations
That the Emperor, of his great nobility,
Has arranged for his daughter, Lady Custance.
Well may men know that such great preparation
No man can tell in a brief statement
As was provided for so important an occasion.
Bishops are appointed to go with her,
Lords, ladies, knights of renown,
And other folk enough; this is the sum of it;
And it is made known throughout the town
That every person, with great devotion,
Should pray Christ that He this marriage
Receive favorably and lend success to this voyage. 
The day is come of her departure;
I say, the woeful fatal day is come,
That there may be no longer tarrying,
But  to go forth they prepare themselves, one and all.
Custance, that was with sorrow all overcome,
Full pale arises, and prepares herself to go;
For well she sees there is no other possible conclusion. 
Alas, what wonder is it though she wept,
She who shall be sent to a foreign nation
From friends who so tenderly cared for her,
And to be bound under subjection
By one, (of whom) she knows not his character?
Husbands are all good, and have been for years;
Wives know that; I dare say you no more.
"Father," she said, "thy wretched child Custance,
Thy young daughter fostered up so tenderly,
And you, my mother, my greatest joy
Over all things, except Christ above,
Custance your child commends herself often
Unto your grace, for I must go to Syria,
Nor shall I never see you again with my eyes.
"Alas, unto the pagan world
I must go right now, since it is your will;
But Christ, that died for our redemption
Give me grace his commands to fulfill!
I, wretched woman, no matter though I die!
Women are born to servitude and suffering,
And to be under man's governance."
I believe at Troy, when Pirrus broke the wall
Before Ilion burned, at Thebes the city,
Nor at Rome, for the harm wrought by Hannibal
Who has vanquished Romans three times,
Was not heard such tender weeping for pity
As in the chamber was for her departing;
But forth she must go, whether she weeps or sings.
O first moving! Cruel firmament,
With thy daily motion that pushes ever
And hurls all from east to west
That naturally would go the other way,
Thy impetus set the heaven in such an arrangement
At the beginning of this dangerous voyage,
That cruel Mars has slain this marriage.
Unfortunate ascending oblique house, [see n.]
From which the lord, helpless, has fallen, alas,
Out of his angle into the most unfavorable house!
O Mars, o dominant planet, in this case!
O feeble moon, unhappy are thy steps!
Thou join thyself where thou art not (well) received;
Where thou were well, from thence art thou driven away.
Imprudent Emperor of Rome, alas!
Was there no astrologer in all thy town?
Is no time better than another in such a case?
For voyages is there no choice of a favorable time,
Especially for folk of noble social status?
Not when an exact date of a birth is known?
Alas, we are too ignorant or too slow in wit!
To ship is brought this woeful fair maid
Solemnly, with every ceremony.
"Now Jesus Christ be with you all!" she said;
There is no more, but "Farewell, fair Custance!"
She takes pains to make a cheerful appearance;
And forth I let her sail in this manner,
And turn I will again to my subject matter.
The mother of the Sultan, well of vices,
Espied has her son's full intention,
How he will leave his old sacrifices;
And right away she sent for her council,
And they are come to know what she intended.
And when this folk was assembled together,
She set herself down, and said as you shall hear.
"Lords," said she, "you know each one of you,
How my son is about to forsake
The holy laws of our Koran,
Given by God's messenger Mohammed.
But one vow to great God I promise,
The life shall rather out of my body go
Before Mohammed's law (goes) out of my heart!
"What should come to us from this new religion
Except slavery to our bodies and suffering,
And afterward to be dragged into hell,
Because we renounced our faith in Mohammed?
But, lords, will you make assurance,
As I shall say, assenting to my teaching,
And I shall make us safe for evermore?"
They swore and agree, every man,
To live with her and die, and by her stand,
And every one, in the best way he can,
To strengthen her shall try (to persuade) all his friends;
And she has this enterprise taken in hand,
Which you shall hear as I shall tell,
And to them all she spoke right in this manner:
"We shall first pretend to receive Christendom --
Cold water shall not grieve us but a little! --
And I shall such a feast and revel make
That, as I believe, I shall pay back the Sultan.
For though his wife be christened never so white,
She shall have need to wash away the red,
Though she a baptismal font full of water bring with her."
O Sultaness, root of iniquity!
Virago, thou Semiramis the second!
O serpent under (cover of) femininity,
Like the serpent deep in hell bound!
O feigned woman, that can destroy all 
Virtue and innocence, through thy malice,
That is bred in thee, nest of every vice!
O Satan, envious since that same day
That thou were chased from our heritage,
Well knowest thou the old way to women!
Thou madest Eva bring us into slavery;
Thou wilt destroy this Christian marriage.
Thy instrument thus -- alas the times! --
Makest thou of women, when thou wilt deceive.
This Sultaness, whom I thus blame and curse,
Privately had her council go their way.
Why should I in this tale longer tarry?
She rides to the Sultan on a day,
And said to him that she would renounce her religion,
And take Christendom from a priest's hands,
Repenting that she heathen was so long,
Beseeching him to do her that honor,
That she might have the Christian folk to feast --
"To please them I will work hard."
The Sultan says, "I will act according to your command."
And kneeling thanks her for that request.
So glad he was, he knew not what to say.
She kissed her son, and home she goes her way.
This Christian folk have come to land
In Syria, with a great solemn company,
And hastily this Sultan sent his messenger
First to his mother, and all the reign about,
And said his wife was come, without doubt,
And prayed her to ride to meet the queen,
The honor of his reign to sustain.
Large was the crowd, and rich was the assembly
Of Syrians and Romans met together;
The mother of the Sultan, richly dressed and gay,
Receives her with as glad a demeanor
As any mother might have for her daughter dear,
And to the nearest city there beside
At a slow pace solemnly they ride.
I do not believe the triumph of Julius,
Of which Lucan makes such a boastful account,
Was more royal nor more splendid
Than was the assembly of this blissful host.
But this scorpion, this wicked spirit,
The Sultaness, for all her flattering,
Planned, under cover of this, very mortally to sting.
The Sultan comes himself soon after this
So royally that it is a wonder to tell,
And welcomes her with all joy and bliss.
And thus in mirth and joy I let them remain;
The essential part of this matter is what I tell.
When time came, men thought it for the best
That revel should stint, and people go to their rest.
The time having come, this old Sultaness
Has arranged this feast of which I told,
And to the feast Christian folk go
All together, yes, both young and old.
Here may men behold feasting and royalty,
And dainties more than I can tell you;
But all too dear they paid for it before they rise (from the feast).
O sudden woe, that ever art successor
To worldly bliss, sprinkled with bitterness,
The end of the joy of our worldly labor!
Woe takes over at the end of our gladness.
Hearken to this counsel for thy safety:
Upon thy glad day have in thy mind
The unexpected woe or harm that follows.
For shortly to tell, at one word,
The Sultan and the Christians each one
Are all hacked to pieces and stabbed at the table,
Except for only Lady Custance alone.
This old Sultaness, cursed crone,
Has with her friends done this cursed deed,
For she herself wanted to rule all the country.
Nor there was any Syrian that was converted,
Who knew of the counsel of the Sultan (followed his advice),
Who was not all hacked to pieces before he could escape.
And Custance have they taken right then, immediately, 
And in a ship entirely without a rudder, God knows,
They have set her, and told her to learn to sail
Out of Syria back to Italy.
A certain amount of treasure that she brought there,
And, to say the truth, a great store of provisions
They have given her, and clothes also she had, 
And forth she sails in the salt see.
O my Custance, full of goodness,
O Emperor's young daughter dear,
He that is lord of Fortune be thy rudder!
She blesses herself, and with full pitiful voice
Unto the cross of Christ thus said she:
"O clear, o blessed altar, holy cross,
Red with the blood of the Lamb full of pity,
That washed the world from the old iniquity,
Keep me from the fiend and from his claws,
That day that I shall drown in the deep.
"Victorious tree, protection of true (believers),
That alone was worthy to bear
The King of Heaven with his fresh wounds,
The white Lamb, that hurt was with a spear,
Banisher of fiends out of man and woman
Over which thy limbs faithfully extend,
Guard me, and give me power my life to amend."
Years and days floated this creature
Throughout the Sea of Greece unto the Strait
Of Gibraltar, as it was her lot.
On many a sorry meal now may she feed;
Full often may she expect her death, 
Before the wild waves will drive her
Unto the place where she shall come to land.
Men might ask why she was not slain
Also at the feast? Who could save her body?
And I answer to that question in reply,
Who saved Daniel in the horrible cave
Where every person except for him, master and servant,
Was devoured by the lion before he could escape?
No one but God Whom he bore in his heart.
God wanted to show his wonderful miracle
In her, so that we should see his mighty works;
Christ, Who is a medicine for every harm,
By certain means often, as know clerks,
Does something for a certain reason that is very obscure
To man's understanding, which, because of our ignorance,
Can not know His prudent foresight.
Now since she was not slain at the feast,
Who kept her from the drowning in the sea?
Who kept Jonas in the fish's maw
Until he was spouted up at Nineveh?
Well may men know it was no one but He
Who kept the Hebrew people from their drowning,
With dry feet through the sea passing.  
Who commanded the four spirits of tempest
That have power to harm land and sea,
Both north and south, and also west and east,
"Harm neither sea, nor land, nor tree"?
Truly, the commander of that was He
Who from the tempest always this woman guarded
As well when she woke as when she slept.
Where could this woman have food and drink
Three years and more? How lasts her store of provisions?
Who fed the Egyptian Mary in the cave,
Or in desert? No person but Christ, without doubt.
It was as great marvel five thousand folk
To feed with five loaves and two fish.
God sent his plenty at their great need.
She drives forth into our ocean
Throughout our wild sea, until at the last
Next to a castle that I can not name,
Far in Northumberland the waves cast her,
And in the sand her ship stuck so fast
That thence it would not (move) for the duration of an entire tide;
The will of Christ was that she should remain there.
The constable of the castle down has come
To see this wreck, and all the ship he searched,
And found this weary woman full of care;
He found also the treasure that she brought.
In her language mercy she besought,
The life out of her body to take away,
Her to deliver from the woe that she was in.
A sort of corrupt Latin was her speech,
But nonetheless by means of this she was understood.
The constable, when he desired no longer to search,
This woeful woman he brought to the land.
She kneels down and gives thanks for what God has sent;
But who she was she would tell no man,
For anything, though she should die.
She said she was so bewildered in the sea
That she lost her memory, by her pledged word (she swore).
The constable has for her such great pity,
And also his wife, that they weep for pity.
She was so diligent, without laziness,
To serve and please every one in that place
That all who look in her face love her.
This constable and Lady Hermengild, his wife,
Were pagans, and (so was) that country everywhere;
But Hermengild loved her as much as her life,
And Custance has so long lived there,
In prayers, with many a bitter tear,
Until Jesus has converted through his grace
Dame Hermengild, wife of the constable of that place.
In all that land no Christians dared assemble;
All Christian folk have fled from that country
Because of pagans, that conquered all about
The coastal regions of the north, by land and sea.
To Wales fled the Christian people
Of old Britons dwelling in this isle;
There was their refuge at that time.
But yet Christian Britons were not so (completely) exiled
That there were not some that in their secrecy
Honored Christ and deceived the heathen folk,
And near the castle there dwelt three such (Christians).
The one of them was blind and could not see,
Unless it were with those eyes of his mind
With which men see, after they have become blind.
Bright was the sun in that summer's day,
For which the constable and his wife also
And Custance have taken the direct route
Toward the sea an eighth of a mile or two,
To amuse themselves and to roam to and fro,
And in their walk this blind man they met,
Bent over and old, with eyes fast shut.
"In the name of Christ," cried this blind Briton,
"Dame Hermengild, give me my sight again!"
This lady grew afraid of these words,
Lest that her husband, shortly to say,
Would have slain her for Jesus Christ's love,
Until Custance made her bold, and told her to work
The will of Christ, as daughter of his church.
The constable grew troubled at that sight,
And said, "What does all this business mean?"
Custance answered, "Sir, it is Christ's might,
That helps folk out of the fiend's snare."
And so completely she did our religion explain
That she the constable, before it was evening,
Converts, and made him believe in Christ.
This constable was in no way lord of this place
Of which I speak, where he Custance found,
But kept it securely many a winter's space of time
Under Alla, king of all Northumberland,
Who was full wise, and worthy of his hand (a mighty warrior)
Against the Scots, as men may well hear;
But I will turn again to my subject.
Satan, that ever waits (for a chance) to trick us,
Saw of Custance all her perfection,
And considered right away how he might repay her, 
And made a young knight that dwelt in that town
Love her so passionately, by foul desire,
That truly he thought he should die,
Unless he might once have his will of her.
He woos her, but it avails not;
She would do no sin, in no way.
And for malice he plotted in his mind
To make her in a shameful death to die.
He waits until the constable was away,
And secretly one night he crept
In Hermengild's bedroom, while she slept.
Weary, exhausted because of her prayers,
Sleeps Custance, and Hermengild also.
This knight, through Satan's temptations,
Very quietly has gone to the bed,
And cut the throat of Hermengild in two,
And laid the bloody knife by Lady Custance,
And went his way, may God give him misfortune!
Soon after, this constable comes home again,
And also Alla, who was king of that land,
And saw his wife mercilessly slain,
For which full often he wept and wrung his hands,
And in the bed the bloody knife he found
By Lady Custance. Alas, what could she say?
For sheer woe her wit was all away.
To king Alla was told all this misfortune,
And also the time, and where, and in what manner
That in a ship was found this Custance,
As before this you have heard tell.
The king's heart for pity trembled,
When he saw so good a creature
Fallen in distress and in misfortune.
For as the lamb toward its death is brought,
So stands this innocent before the king.
This false knight, who has this treason wrought,
Falsely testifies that she has done this thing.
But nonetheless, there was great mourning
Among the people, and they say they can not imagine
That she had done so great a wickedness,
For they have seen her always so virtuous,
And loving Hermengild as much as her life.
Of this bore witness every one in that house,
Except for him who slew Hermengild with his knife.
This gentle king was deeply moved
By this witness, and thought he would enquire
Deeper in this, to learn the truth.
Alas! Custance, thou hast no champion,
And fight can thou not, alas!
But He that died for our redemption,
And bound Satan (and he yet lies where he lay),
So be thy strong champion this day!
For, unless Christ a clear miracle reveals,
Without guilt thou shalt be slain immediately.
She set herself down on knees, and thus she said:
"Immortal God, that savedest Susannah
From false blame, and thou, merciful maid,
Mary I mean, daughter to Saint Anne,
Before whose child angels sing Hosanna,
If I be guiltless of this felony,
My succor be, for otherwise I shall dye!"
Have you not seen sometime a pale face,
Among a crowd, of him that has been led
Toward his death, where he got no reprieve,
And such a color in his face has had
Men might know his face that was in trouble
Amongst all the faces in that route?
So stands Custance, and looks around her.
O queens, living in prosperity,
Duchesses, and you ladies each one,
Have some pity on her adversity!
An Emperor's daughter stands alone;
She has no person to whom to lament (plead for help).
O blood royal, that stands in this dreadful state,
Far away are thy friends at thy great need!
This king Alla has such compassion,
Since a noble heart is filled with pity,
That from his eyes ran the water down.
"Now hastily have a book fetched," said he,
"And if this knight will swear how that she
Slew this woman, then will we think carefully about
Whom we desire to be our judge (i.e., bring her to trial)."
A British book, in which were written the gospels,
Was fetched, and on this book he swore at once 
That she was guilty, and in the same moment
A hand struck him upon the neck-boon,
That down he fell at once like a stone,
And both his eyes burst out of his face
In sight of every body in that place.
A voice was heard by everyone there,
And it said, "Thou hast slandered, guiltless,
The daughter of holy church in the presence of the High One (God);
Thus hast thou done, and yet I hold my peace!"
Of this marvel terrified was all the crowd of people;
Like bewildered folk they stood each one,
For fear of vengeance, except for Custance alone.
Great was the fear and also the repentance
Of them that had a wrong suspicion
Of this blessed innocent, Custance;
And because of this miracle, in conclusion,
And by Custance's mediation,
The king -- and many another in that place --
Converted was, thanked be Christ's grace!
This false knight was slain for his untruth
By judgment of Alla immediately;
And yet Custance had for his death great pity.
And after this Jesus, of His mercy,
Made Alla wed full solemnly
This holy maiden, that is so bright and beautiful;
And thus has Christ made Custance a queen.
But who was woeful, if I shall not lie,
Of this wedding but Donegild, and no others,
The king's mother, full of tyranny?
She thought her cursed heart broke in two.
She wished that her son had not done so;
She thought it an insult that he should take
So foreign a creature as his mate.
I do not want of the chaff, nor of the straw,
To make so long a tale as of the grain (the essential part).
Why should I tell of the royalty
At the marriage, or which course goes before;
Who blows in a trumpet or in a horn?
The fruit (the essential part) of every tale is to be told:
They eat, and drink, and dance, and sing, and play.
They go to bed, as it was reasonable and right;
For though wives are full holy things,
They must take in patience at night
Such sorts of necessary acts as are pleasing
To folk that have wedded them with rings,
And (they must) lay their holiness aside a little while,
As for the time being -- it can be no better.
On her he begot a male child quickly,
And to a bishop, and his constable also,
He gave his wife to protect, when he is gone
Toward Scotland, his foemen to seek.
Now fair Custance, who is so humble and meek,
So long is gone with child, until that quietly
She keeps to her chamber, abiding Christ's will.
The time is come a male child she bore;
Mauricius at the baptismal font they call him.
This constable orders a messenger to come forth,
And wrote unto his king, who was called Alla,
How this blissful event has occurred,
And other tidings useful to be said.
He takes the letter, and forth he goes his way.
This messenger, to do (something for) his profit,
Unto the king's mother rides quickly,
And salutes her full fair in his language:
"Madame," said he, "you may be glad and happy,
And thank God a hundred thousand times!
My lady queen has a child, without doubt,
As a joy and bliss to all this reign about.
"Lo, here (are) the letters sealed of this business,
That I must bear with all the haste I can.
If you will (send) anything unto your son the king,
I am at your service, both night and day."
Donegild answered, "Right now, at this time, no;
But here all night I want that thou take thy rest.
Tomorrow will I say to thee what I wish."
This messenger drank heavily ale and wine,
And stolen were his letters secretly
Out of his box, while he slept like a pig;
And counterfeited was full subtly
Another letter, made full sinfully,
Directed unto the king concerning this matter
From his constable, as you shall after hear.
The letter said the queen delivered was
Of so horrible a fiendish creature
That in the castle no one was so bold
That for any length of time dared to remain near it.
The mother was an evil spirit, by chance
Come, by charms or by sorcery,
And every person hates her company.
Woe was this king when he this letter had seen,
But to no person he told his painful sorrows,
But by his own hand he wrote in answer,
"Welcome be the dispensation of Christ for evermore
To me that am now learned in his teaching!
Lord, welcome be thy desire and thy pleasure;
I put all my will in thy governance.
"Guard this child, whether it be foul or fair,
And also my wife, until my home-coming.
Christ, when He pleases, may send me an heir
Moore agreeable than this to my desire."
This letter he seals, secretly weeping,
Which to the messenger was given soon,
And forth he goes; there is nothing more to do.
O messenger, filled with drunkenness,
Strong is thy breath, thy limbs ever tremble,
And thou betray all secrets.
Thy mind is lost, thou chatter like a jay,
Thy face is completely changed. 
Where drunkenness reigns in any group,
There is no secret hidden, without doubt.
O Donegild, I do not have any English suitable (to describe)
Unto thy malice and thy tyranny!
And therefore to the fiend I thee consign;
Let him write about thy treachery!
Fie, like a man, fie! -- o nay, by God, I lie --
Fie, like a fiendish spirit, for I dare well tell,
Though thou here walk, thy spirit is in hell!
This messenger comes from the king again,
And at the king's mother's court he dismounted,
And she was very happy because of this messenger,
And (she) pleased him in all that ever she could.
He drank, and well stuffed (drink) under his belt;
He sleeps, and he snorts in his way
All night, until the sun did arise.
Again were his letters stolen every one,
And counterfeited letters in this manner:
"The king commands his constable at once,
Upon pain of hanging, and of strict judicial punishment,
That he should not allow in any manner
Custance within his realm to remain
Three days and a quarter of duration of a tide (three hours);
"But in the same ship as he her found,
Her, and her young son, and all her gear,
He should put, and push her from the land,
And command her that she never again come here."
O my Custance, well may thy spirit have fear,
And, sleeping, in thy dream to be in suffering,
When Donegild devised all this plan.
This messenger in the morning, when he awoke,
Unto the castle goes the nearest way,
And to the constable he gave the letter;
And when that he this pitiful letter saw,
Full often he said, "Alas and woe!"
"Lord Christ," said he, "how can this world endure,
So full of sin is so many a creature?
"O mighty God, if it be thy will,
Since thou art rightful judge, how may it be
That thou wilt allow innocents to die,
And wicked folk to reign in prosperity?
O good Custance, alas, so woeful am I
That I must be thy tormentor, or die
In a shameful death; there is no other way."
Weep both young and old in all that place
When the king this cursed letter sent,
And Custance, with a deadly pale face,
The fourth day toward her ship she went.
But nonetheless she takes in good faith
The will of Christ, and kneeling on the strand,
She said, "Lord, always welcome be thy dispensation!
"He that me kept from the false blame
While I was on the land amongst you,
He can keep me from harm and also from shame
In the salt sea, although I see not how.
As strong as ever He was, He is yet now.
In Him trust I, and in his mother dear,
Who is to me my sail and also my rudder."
Her little child lay weeping in her arm,
And kneeling, pitifully to him she said,
"Peace, little son, I will do thee no harm."
With that her kerchief off her head she pulled,
And over his little eyes she it laid,
And in her arm she lulls it fast asleep,
And into heaven her eyes up she caste.
"Mother," said she, "and maiden bright, Mary,
True it is that through woman's instigation
Mankind was lost, and damned forever to die,
For which thy child was on a cross stretched.
Thy blissful eyes saw all his torment;
Then is there no comparison between
Thy woe and any woe man may sustain.
"Thou saw thy child slain before thy eyes,
And yet now lives my little child, in faith!
Now, lady bright, to whom all woeful (people) cry,
Thou glory of womanhood, thou fair maiden,
Thou haven of refuge, bright star of day,
Have pity on my child, (thou who) of thy nobility
Takes pity on every wretched person in distress.
"O little child, alas! What is thy guilt,
That never did sin as yet, in faith?
Why will thy hard father have thee killed?
O mercy, dear constable," said she,
"Let my little child remain here with thee;
And if thou dare not save him, for fear of punishment,
Kiss him once in his father's name!"
Therewith she looked backward to the land,
And said, "Farewell, ruthless husband!"
And up she rises, and walks down the strand
Toward the ship -- all the crowd follows her --
And ever she prays her child to hold his peace;
And takes her leave, and with a holy attitude
She blesses herself, and into the ship she went.
Supplied with food was the ship, it is no doubt,
Abundantly for her very long time (of sailing),
And other necessities that should be needed
She had enough -- praised be God's grace!
For wind and weather almighty God provide,
And bring her home! I can no better say,
But in the sea she drives forth on her way.
Alla the king comes home soon after this
Unto his castle, of the which I told,
And asks where his wife and his child is.
The constable began about his heart to grow cold,
And plainly the whole affair he him told
As you have heard -- I can tell it no better --
And shows the king his seal and also his letter,
And said, "Lord, as you commanded me
Upon pain of death, so have I done, certainly."
This messenger tortured was until he
Had to reveal and tell, bluntly and plainly,
From night to night, in what place he had lain;
And thus, by wit and subtle questioning,
Deduced was by whom this harm did spring.
The hand was known that the letter wrote,
And all the venom of this cursed deed,
But in what manner (this was done), certainly, I know not.
The effect is this: that Alla, without doubt,
His mother slew -- that may men plainly read --
Because she traitor was to her allegiance.
Thus ends old Donegild, with bad luck to her!
The sorrow that this Alla night and day
Makes for his wife, and for his child also,
There is no tongue that it can tell.
But now will I go unto Custance,
Who floats in the sea, in pain and woe,
Five years and more, as it pleased Christ's dispensation,
Before her ship approached unto land.
Alongside a heathen castle, at the last,
Of which the name in my text I do not find,
Custance, and also her child, the sea up cast. 
Almighty God, that saves all mankind,
Have for Custance and for her child some thought,
Who fallen is in heathen hand once more,
On the point of dying, as I shall tell you soon.
Down from the castle comes there many a person
To stare on this ship and on Custance.
But shortly, from the castle, on a night,
The lord's steward -- God give him bad luck! --
A thief, that had renounced our religion,
Came into ship alone, and said he should
Her lover be, whether she would or would not.
Woebegone then was this wretched woman;
Her child cried, and she cried pitifully.
But blissful Mary helped her right then;
For with her struggling well and mightily
The thief fell over board all suddenly,
And in the sea he drowned as a punishment;
And thus has Christ kept Custance undefiled.
O foul lust of lechery, lo, thy end!
Not only that thou make man's mind grow faint,
But truly thou wilt his body destroy.
The end of thy work, or of thy blind desires,
Is lamentation. How many a one may men find
That not for the deed sometimes, but for the intention
To do this sin, are either slain or destroyed!
How may this weak woman have this strength
Herself to defend against this renegade?
O Goliath, immeasurable of height,
How could David make thee so defeated,
So young and so lacking in arms and armor?
How dared he look upon thy dreadful face?
Well may men see, it was nothing but God's grace.
Who gave Judith courage or hardiness
To slay that Holofernes in his tent,
And to deliver out of wretchedness
The people of God? I say, for this purpose,
That just as God the spirit of vigor sent
To them and saved them out of misfortune,
So sent he might and vigor to Custance.
Forth goes her ship throughout the narrow mouth
Of Gibraltar and Morocco, driving ever
Sometimes west, and sometimes north and south,
And sometimes east, full many a weary day,
Until Christ's mother -- blessed be she always! --
Has devised a plan, through her endless goodness,
To make an end of all her sadness.
Now let us stint of Custance but a short while,
And speak we of the Roman Emperor,
That out of Syria has by letters known
The slaughter of Christian folk, and dishonor
Done to his daughter by a false traitor,
I mean the cursed wicked Sultaness
That at the feast caused to be slain both high ranking and low.
For which this Emperor has sent at once
His senator, with royal armaments,
And other lords, God knows, many a one,
On Syrians to take great vengeance.
They burn, slay, and bring them to misery
Full many a day; but shortly -- this is the end --
Homeward to Rome they prepared themselves to wend.
This senator goes with victory
Toward Rome, sailing full royally,
And met the ship sailing, as says the story,
In which Custance sits full piteously.
In no way knew he who she was, nor why
She was in such a state, she will not tell
Of her rank, although she should die.
He brings her to Rome, and to his wife
He gave her, and her young son also;
And with the senator she led her life.
Thus can Our Lady bring out of woe
Woeful Custance, and many another more.
And long time dwelled she in that place,
In holy works ever, as was her special gift of God.
The senator's wife was her aunt,
But for all that she knew her never the more.
I will no longer tarry in this case,
But to king Alla, whom I spoke of formerly,
Who for his wife weeps and sighs sore,
I will return, and I will leave Custance
Under the senator's governance.
King Alla, who had his mother slain,
Upon a day fell in such repentance
That, if I shortly tell shall and plainly,
To Rome he comes to receive his penance;
And put him in the Pope's governance
In all things, and Jesus Christ besought
To forgive his wicked deeds that he did.
The news at once through Rome town is carried,
How Alla king shall come in pilgrimage,
By arrangers of lodging that went before him;
For which the senator, as was the custom,
Rode to meet him, and many of his lineage,
As well to show his high magnificence
As to do any king a reverence.
Great friendliness shows this noble senator
To king Alla, and he to him also;
Every one of them does the other great honor.
And so it happened that in a day or two
This senator is to king Alla gone
To feast, and shortly, if I shall not lie,
Custance's son went in his company.
Some men would say at request of Custance
This senator has led this child to the feast;
I can not tell every detail --
Be as be may, there he was at the least.
But the truth is this, that at his mother's command
Before Alla, during the meal time,
The child stood, looking in the king's face.
This king Alla has of this child great wonder,
And to the senator he said at once,
"Whose is that fair child that stands yonder?"
"I do not know," said he, "by God, and by Saint John!
A mother he has, but father has he none
That I know of" -- and shortly, in a little while,
He told Alla how this child was found.
"But God knows," said this senator also,
"So virtuous a liver in my life
Saw I never as she, nor heard of more,
Of worldly women, maiden, nor of wife.
I dare well say she had rather have a knife
Through her breast, than be a woman wicked;
There is no man could bring her to that point."
Now was this child as like unto Custance
As it is possible for a creature to be.
This Alla has the face in remembrance
Of Lady Custance, and thereon mused he
If the child's mother were in any way she
Who is his wife, and secretly he sighed,
And sped himself from the table as fast as he could.
"In faith," thought he, "hallucination is in my head!
I ought to believe, by reasonable judgment,
That in the salt sea my wife is dead."
And afterward he made his contrary argument:
"What know I if Christ has hither sent
My wife by sea, as well as he her sent
To my country from thence that she went?"
And after noon, home with the senator
Goes Alla, to see this wonderful happening.
This senator does Alla great honor,
And hastily he sent after Custance.
But trust well, she did not want to dance
When she knew the reason for that summons;
Hardly upon her feet she could stand.
When Alla saw his wife, gently he greeted her,
And wept that it was a pity to see;
For at the first look he on her set
He knew well indeed that it was she.
And she, for sorrow, stands as dumb as a tree,
So was her heart shut (pressed by emotion) in her distress,
When she remembered his unnatural cruelty.
Twice she swooned in his own sight;
He wept, and himself excuses piteously.
"Now God," said he, "and his saints bright
As surely as they may have mercy on my soul,
(I swear) that of your harm I am as guiltless
As is Maurice my son, whose face is so like yours;
Otherwise (may) the fiend me fetch out of this place!"
Long was the sobbing and the bitter pain,
Before their woeful hearts might cease (giving pain);
Great was the pity to hear them lament,
Through which lamentations began their woe to increase.
I pray you to release me from all my labor;
I can not tell their woe until to-morrow,
I am so weary from speaking of sorrow.
But finally, when the truth is known
That Alla was guiltless of her woe,
I believe a hundred times they have kissed,
And such a bliss is there between them two
That, except for the joy that lasts evermore,
There is none like it that any creature
Has seen or shall (see), while the world may endure.
Then prayed she her husband meekly,
In relief of her long, pitiful pain,
That he would pray her father specially
That of his majesty he would incline
To grant some day with him to dine.
She prayed him also he should by no means
Unto her father say any word of her.
Some men would say that the child Maurice
Takes this message unto this Emperor;
But, as I guess, Alla was not so foolish
To him that was of such high honor
As he that is of Christian folk the flower,
To have sent any child, but it is better to believe
He went himself, and that would be most fitting.
This Emperor has agreed nobly
To come to dinner, as he him requested;
And well read I (in my source) he looked intently
Upon this child, and thought about his daughter.
Alla goes to his inn, and as he should,
Prepared for this feast in every way
So far as his ability may suffice.
The morning came, and Alla began to prepare himself,
And also his wife, to meet this Emperor;
And forth they ride in joy and in gladness.
And when she saw her father in the street,
She dismounted, and falls to his feet.
"Father," said she, "your young child Custance
Is now completely out of your remembrance.
"I am your daughter Custance," said she,
"Whom long ago you have sent unto Syria.
It am I, father, that in the salt sea
Was put alone and damned to die.
Now, good father, mercy I beg of you!
Send me no more unto any heathen country,
But thank my lord here of his kindnesses."
Who can tell all the pitiful joy 
Between them three, since they are thus met?
But of my tale I shall make an end;
The day goes fast, I will no longer delay.
This glad folk to dinner they themselves set;
In joy and bliss at their meal I let them remain
A thousand fold well more (blissful) than I can tell.
This child Maurice was later Emperor
Made by the Pope, and lived in a Christian manner;
To Christ's church he did great honor.
But I let all his story pass by;
Of Custance is my tale in particular.
In the old Roman histories may men find
Maurice's life; I bear it not in mind.
This king Alla, when he his time saw,
With his Custance, his holy wife so sweet,
To England are they come by the direct route,
Where they live in joy and in quiet.
But little while it lasts, I you promise,
Joy of this world, because time will not stand still;
From day to night it changes like the tide.
Who lived ever in such delight one day
That he was not moved by either conscience,
Or anger, or desire, or some kind of fear,
Envy, or pride, or passion, or offence?
I make this statement only for this conclusion,
That little while in joy or in pleasure
Lasts the bliss of Alla with Custance.
For Death, that takes of high ranking and low his payment,
When passed was a year, as I suppose,
Out of this world this king Alla he seized,
For whom Custance has full great sadness.
Now let us pray God his soul be blessed!
And Lady Custance, finally to say,
Toward the town of Rome goes her way.
To Rome has come this holy creature,
And finds her friends whole and sound;
Now has she escaped all her adventure.
And when she her father has found,
Down on her knees falls she to ground;
Weeping for tenderness blithe in heart,
She praises God a hundred thousand times.
In virtue and in holy charitable works
They all live, and never parted;
Until death departs them, this life they lead.
And fare now well! my tale is at an end.
Now Jesus Christ, that of his might may send
Joy after woe, govern us in his grace,
And keep us all that are in this place! Amen
[Our Host upon his stirrups stood up at once,
And said, "Good men, listen every one!
This was a excellent tale for this occasion!
Sir Parish Priest," said he, "for God's bones,
Tell us a tale, as was thy previous agreement.
I see well that you men learned in lore
Know much that is good, by God's dignity!"
The Parson him answered, "Bless me!
What ails the man, so sinfully to swear?"
Our Host answered, "O Jankin, are you there?
I smell a Lollard in the wind," said he.
"Now! good men," said our Host, "listen to me;
Wait, for God's worthy passion,
For we shall have a sermon;
This Lollard here will preach us something."
"Nay, by my father's soul, that shall he not!"
Said the Shipman, "Here shall he not preach;
He shall no gospel interpret here nor teach.
We all believe in the great God," said he;
"He would sow some difficulty,
Or sprinkle weeds in our clean grain.
And therefore, Host, I warn thee beforehand,
My handsome body shall tell a tale,
And I shall clink you so merry a bell,
That I shall awaken all this company.
But it shall not be of philosophy,
Nor legal cases, nor elaborate terms of law.
There is but little Latin in my maw!"]
ALIGN=top></A></LEFT> Texts on this page prepared and maintained by L. D. Benson <A HREF="mailto:ldb@wjh.harvard.edu">(ldb@wjh.harvard.edu)</A> 
