"Whoa!" said the Knight, "good sire, no more of this!
What you have said is quite enough, indeed,
And much more; for a little sadness
Is quite enough for many people, I guess.
I say for myself, it is a great distress,
When men have been in great wealth and ease,
To hear of their sudden fall, alas!
And the contrary is joy and great comfort,
As when a man has been in a poor condition,
And climbs up and becomes fortunate,
And there remains in prosperity.
Such a thing is pleasing, as it seems to me,
And of such a thing it would be good to tell."
"Yea," said our Host, "by Saint Paul's bell!
You say the very truth; this Monk he chatters noisily.
He spoke of how Fortune covered with a cloud
I know not what; and also of a tragedy
Just now you heard, and by God, no remedy
Is it to bewail or lament
That which is done, and also it is a pain,
As you have said, to hear of sadness.
"Sir Monk, no more of this, as God may you bless!
Your tale annoys all this company.
Such talking is not worth a butterfly,
For in it there is no pleasure nor amusement.
Therefore, Sir Monk, dan Piers by your name,
I pray yow earnestly tell us something else;
For truly, were it not for the clinking of your bells
That on your bridle hang on every side,
By heaven's King who for us all died,
I should before this have fallen down because of sleepiness,
Although the mud had never been so deep;
Then had your tale been told all in vain.
For certainly, as these clerks say,
Where a man may have no hearers,
It is no use to tell his opinion.
"And well I know the capacity of appreciation is in me,
If any thing shall be well told.
Sir, say something about hunting, I you pray."
"Nay," said this Monk, "I have no desire to play.
Now let another tell, as I have told."
Then spoke oure Host with rude speech and bold,
And said unto the Nun's Priest straightway,
"Come near, thou priest, come hither, thou sir John!
Tell us such thing as may our hearts gladden.
Be happy, though thou ride upon a nag.
What if thy horse be both poor and lean?
If he will serve thee, care not a bean.
See that thy heart be merry evermore."
"Yes indeed, sir," said he, "yes indeed, Host, as I may I prosper,
Unless I be merry, indeed I will be blamed."
And right away his tale he has begun,
And thus he said unto us every one,
A poor widow, somewhat advanced in age,
Was once dwelling in a small cottage,
Beside a grove, standing in a dale.
This widow, of whom I tell you my tale,
Since that same day that she was last a wife
In patience led a very simple life,
For little was her possessions and her income.
By husbandry of such as God sent her
She provided for herself and also her two daughters.
She had three large sows, and no more,
Three cows, and also a sheep that is called Malle.
Full sooty was her bedchamber and also her hall,
In which she ate very many a scanty meal.
She needed not a bit of spicy sauce.
No dainty morsel passed through her throat; 
Her diet was such as her farm produced.
Overeating never made her sick; 
Moderate diet was all her medical treatment,
And exercise, and a contented heart.
The gout not at all prevented her from dancing,
And apoplexy harmed not her head.
No wine she drank, neither white nor red; 
Her board was provided mostly with white and black --
Milk and dark bread, in which she found no lack,
Broiled bacon, and sometimes an egg or two,
For she was, as it were, a sort of dairywoman.
She had a yard, enclosed all around 
With sticks, and a dry ditch outside it,
In which she had a cock, called Chauntecleer.
In all the land, there was not his peer in crowing.
His voice was merrier than the merry organ
That goes in the church on mass-days.
Well more accurate was his crowing in his lodge
Than is a clock or an abbey timepiece.
By nature he knew (the hour of) each ascension
Of the celestial equator in that same town; 
For when degrees fifteen were ascended,
Then he crowed so that it could not be improved.
His comb was redder than the fine coral,
And notched with battlements as if it were a castle wall; 
His bill was black, and it shone like the jet stone; 
Like azure were his legs and his toes; 
His nails whiter than the lily flour,
And like the burnished gold was his color.
This gentle cock had in his governance
Seven hens to do all his pleasure,
Which were his sisters and his concubines,
And wonderfully like him, in their colors; 
Of which the fairest colored on her throat
Was called fair demoiselle Pertelote.
Courteous she was, discreet, and gracious,
And companionable, and bore herself so fair
Since that same day that she was seven nights old
That truly she has in possession the heart 
Of Chauntecleer, locked in every limb (completely); 
He loved her so that well was him because of that.
But such a joy it was to hear them sing,
When the bright sun began to spring,
In sweet accord, "My love has gone to the country!" --
For in that same time, as I have understood,
Beasts and birds could speak and sing.
And so befell that in a dawning,
As Chauntecleer among all his wives
Sat on his perch, that was in the hall,
And next to him sat this faire Pertelote,
This Chauntecleer began to groan in his throat,
As one that in his dream is deeply troubled.
And when Pertelote thus heard him roar,
She was aghast and said, "Dear heart,
What ails you, to groan in this manner?
You are a true (sound) sleeper; fie, for shame!"
And he answered, and said thus: "Madame,
I pray you that you take it not amiss.
By God, I dreamed I was in such mischief
Right now that yet my heart is grievously frightened.
Now God," said he, "interpret my dream correctly,
And keep my body out of foul prison!
I dreamed how I roamed up and down
Within our yard, where I saw a beast
Was like a hound, and would have seized 
Upon my body, and would have had me dead.
His color was between yellow and red,
And tipped was his tail and both his ears
With black, unlike the rest of his hair; 
His snout small, with two glowing eyes.
Yet for fear of his look I almost die; 
This caused my groaning, doubtless."
"Shame!" said she, "fie on you, coward!
Alas," said she, "for, by that God above,
Now have you lost my heart and all my love!
I can not love a coward, by my faith!
For certainly, whatever any woman says,
We all desire, if it might be,
To have husbands hardy, wise, and generous,
And secret -- and no miser, nor no fool,
Nor him who is afraid of every weapon,
Nor any boaster, by that God above!
How dare you say, for shame, unto your love
That any thing might make you afraid?
Have you no man's heart, and have a beard? 
Alas! And can you be frightened of dreams?
Nothing, God knows, but foolishness is in dreams.
Dreams are produced by overeating,
And often by stomach vapors and by the mixture of bodily humors,
When humors are too abundant in a person.
Certainly this dream, which you have dreamed to-night,
Comes of the great superfluity
Of your red choleric humor, indeed,
Which causes folk in their dreams to be afraid 
Of arrows, and of fire with red flames,
Of red beasts, (fearing) that they will bite them,
Of strife, and of dogs, big and little; 
Right as the humor of melancholy
Causes very many a man in sleep to cry
For fear of black bears, or black bulls,
Or else black devils will take them.
Of other humors could I tell also
That cause many a man much woe (in) sleep; 
But I will pass over as lightly as I can.
"Lo Cato, who was so wise a man,
Said he not thus, `Attach no importance to dreams'?
"Now sir," said she, "when we fly from the beams,
For God's love, take some laxative.
Upon peril of my soul and of my life,
I counsel you the best -- I will not lie --
That both of choler and of melancholy
You purge yourself; and so that you shall not delay,
Though in this town is no apothecary,
I shall myself guide you to herbs 
That shall be for your health and for your benefit; 
And in our yard I shall find those herbs 
The which by nature have the power
To purge you beneath and also above.
Forget not this, for God's own love!
You are dominated by the choleric humor; 
Beware the sun when it is high in the sky
And do not find yourself with an excess of hot humors.
And if there be an excess, I dare well bet four pence,
That you shall have a fever recurring every three days,
Or an ague that may be your death.
A day or two you shall have digestives
Of worms, before you take your laxatives
Of spurge laurel, centaury, and fumitory,
Or else of hellebore, that grows there,
Of caper-spurge, or of rhamus,
Of ground ivy, growing in our yard, where it is pleasant; 
Peck them up right as they grow and eat them in.
Be merry, husband, for your father's kin!
Dread no dream; I can say you no more."
"Madame," said he, "great thanks for your learning.
But nonetheless, as touching dan Cato,
That has of wisdom such a great renown,
Though he commanded (us) to dread no dreams,
By God, men may in old books read
Of many a man of more authority
Than Cato ever was, as I may prosper,
Who say all the reverse of this sentence,
And have well found by experience
That dreams are significations
As well of joy as of tribulations
That folk endure in this present life.
There need be no argument about this; 
The proof itself shows it in the deed.
"One of the greatest author that men read
Says thus: that once two fellows went
On pilgrimage, with a very good intention,
And it so happened, they came in a town
Where there was such a gathering
Of people, and also such a scantiness of lodging,
That they found not so much as one cottage
In which they both might be lodged.
Therefore they must of necessity,
For that night, part company; 
And each of them goes to his hostelry,
And took his lodging as it would befall.
The one of them was lodged in a stall,
Far in a yard, with oxen of the plough; 
That other man was lodged well enough,
As was his adventure or his fortune,
Which us governs all in common.
"And it so befell that, long before it was day,
This man dreamed in his bed, where he lay,
How his fellow began to call upon him,
And said, `Alas, for in an oxen's stall
This night I shall be murdered where I lie!
Now help me, dear brother, or I die.
In all haste come to me!' he said.
This man out of his sleep for fear awakened suddenly; 
But when he was wakened of his sleep,
He turned himself and took no heed of this.
He thought his dream was nothing but a fantasy.
Thus twice in his sleeping he dreamed; 
And at third time yet his fellow
Came, as it seemed to him, and said, `I am now slain.
Behold my bloody wounds deep and wide!
Arise up early in the morning time,
And at the west gate of the town,' he said,
`A cart full of dung there shalt thou see,
In which my body is hid very secretly; 
Have that same cart immediately seized.
My gold caused my murder, to say the truth,'
And told him in full detail how he was slain,
With a very piteous face, pale of hue.
And trust well, his dream he found very true,
For on the morrow, as soon as it was day,
To his fellow's inn he took the way; 
And when he came to this oxen's stall,
After his fellow he began to call.
"The innkeeper answered him straightway,
And said, `Sir, your fellow is gone.
As soon as it was day he went out of the town.'
"This man began to fall in suspicion,
Remembering his dreams that he dreamed,
And forth he goes -- no longer would he delay --
Unto the west gate of the town, and found
A dung-cart, which went as if it were to dung land,
That was drawn up in that same manner
As you have heard the dead man tell.
And with a hardy heart he began to cry for
Vengeance and justice of this felony:
`My fellow is murdered this same night,
And in this cart he lies gaping upright.
I cry out on the officials,' said he,
`Who should guard and rule this city.
Help! Alas! Here lies my fellow slain!'
What should I more unto this tale say?
The people rushed out and cast the cart to ground,
And in the middle of the dung they found
The dead man, who was just recently murdered.
"O blissful God, that art so just and true,
Lo, how thou always reveal murder!
Murder will out; we see that day by day.
Murder is so disgusting and abominable
To God, who is so just and reasonable,
That He will not suffer it to be hidden,
Though it may wait a year, or two, or three.
Murder will out, this is my conclusion.
And immediately, officials of that town
Have seized the carter and so painfully tortured him,
And also the hosteller so grievously tortured,
That they straightway acknowledged their wickedness,
And were hanged by the neck-bone.
"Here men may seen that dreams are to be feared.
And certainly in the same book I read,
Right in the next chapter after this --
I do not lie, as I may have joy or bliss --
Two men that would have passed over see,
For a certain reason, into a far country,
If that the wind had not been contrary,
That made them to tarry in a city 
That stood very merrily upon an haven-side; 
But on a day, toward the evening time,
The wind began to change, and blew exactly as they desired.
Jolly and glad they went unto their rest,
And they planned to sail very early.
But listen! To that one man befell a great marvel:
The one of them, in sleeping as he lay,
He dreamed a wondrous dream before the day.
He thought a man stood by his bed's side,
And commanded him that he should stay,
And said to him thus: `If thou travel tomorrow,
Thou shalt be drowned; my tale is at an end.'
He woke, and told his fellow what he dreamed,
And prayed him to delay his voyage; 
For that day, he prayed him to wait.
His fellow, that lay by his bed's side,
Began to laugh, and vigorously scorned him.
`No dream,' said he, `may so frighten my heart
That I will desist from doing my tasks.
I set not a straw by (put no value on) thy dreams,
For dreams are but fantasies and foolishness.
Men dream all the time of owls and of apes,
And of many a source of amazement indeed; 
Men dream of a thing that never was nor shall be.
But since I see that thou will remain here,
And thus willfully waste thy tide,
God knows, it makes me sorry; and have good day!'
And thus he took his leave, and went his way.
But before he had sailed half his course,
I know not why, nor what mischance harmed it,
But by chance the ship's bottom broke open,
And ship and man went under the water 
In sight of other ships beside it,
That with them sailed on the same tide.
And therefore, faire Pertelote so dear,
By such old examples thou may learn
That no man should be too heedless
Of dreams; for I say to thee, doubtless,
That many a dream is very greatly to be feared.
"Lo, I read in the life of Saint Kenelm,
That was son of Kenulphus, the noble king
Of Mercia, how Kenelm dreamed a thing.
A little before he was murdered, on a day,
He saw his murder in his vision.
His nurse completely explained to him
His dream, and ordered him to guard himself well
From treason; but he was only seven years old,
And therefore he put little store
In any dream, so holy was his heart.
By God! I had rather than my shirt (give my shirt)
That you had read his legend, as have I.
"Dame Pertelote, I say you truly,
Macrobius, that wrote the vision
In Africa of the worthy Scipio,
Affirms (the value of) dreams, and says that they are
Warnings of things that men later see (come to pass)
And furthermore, I pray you, look well
In the Old Testament, concerning Daniel,
If he held dreams (to be) any foolishness.
Read also of Joseph, and there shall you see
Whether dreams are sometimes -- I say not all --
Warnings of things that shall afterward befall.
Consider the king of Egypt, dan Pharaoh,
His baker and his butler also,
Whether or not they felt any effect in dreams.
Whoever will seek out the histories of various nations
May read many a wonderful thing about dreams.
Lo Croesus, who was king of Lydia,
Dreamed he not that he sat upon a tree,
Which signified he should be hanged?
Lo here Andromacha, Hector's wife,
That day that Hector should lose his life,
She dreamed on the same night before
How the life of Hector should be lost,
If that same day he went into battle.
She warned him, but it might not avail; 
He went to fight nonetheless,
But he was slain straightway by Achilles.
But that same tale is all too long to tell,
And also it is nigh day; I may not delay.
Shortly I say, as for conclusion,
That I shall have of this vision
Adversity; and I say furthermore
That I put no store in laxatives,
For they are poisonous, I know it well; 
I renounce them, I love them not at all!
"Now let us speak of mirth, and stop all this.
Madame Pertelote, as I may have bliss,
Of one thing God has sent me a great favor; 
For when I see the beauty of your face,
You are so scarlet red about your eyes,
It makes all my dread die; 
For as surely as `In the beginning,
`Woman is the ruin of man --'
Madame, the meaning of this Latin is,
`Woman is man's joy and all his bliss.'
For when I feel at night your soft side --
Although I can not on you ride,
Because our perch is made so narrow, alas --
I am so full of joy and of pleasure,
That I renounce both vision and dream."
And with that word he flew down from the beam,
For it was day, and also all his hens,
And with a cluck he began to call them,
Because he had found a seed, which lay in the yard.
Royal he was, he was no longer afraid.
He embraced Pertelote twenty times,
And copulated with her also as often, before it was 6 a.m..
He looks as if he were a grim lion,
And on his toes he roams up and down; 
He deigned not to set his foot to ground.
He clucks when he has found a seed,
And then his wives all run to him.
Thus royal, as a prince is in his hall,
Leave I this Chauntecleer in his feeding place,
And after I will tell his adventure.
When the month in which the world began,
Which is called March, when God first made man,
Was complete, and passed were also,
Since March had gone, thirty days and two,
Befell that Chauntecleer in all his pride,
His seven wives walking by his side,
Cast up his eyes to the bright sun,
That in the sign of Taurus had run
Twenty degrees and one, and somewhat more,
And knew by nature, and by none other knowledge,
That it was prime, and crowed with blissful voice.
"The sun," he said, "has climbed up on heaven
Forty degrees and one, and more indeed.
Madame Pertelote, my world's bliss,
Listen to these blissful birds, how they sing,
And see the fresh flowers, how they spring; 
My heart is full of revel and pleasure!"
But suddenly to him befell a sorrowful situation,
For ever the latter end of joy is woe.
God knows that worldly joy is soon gone; 
And if a rhetorician could fairly compose,
He in a chronicle confidently could write it 
As a supremely important fact.
Now every wise man, let him listen to me; 
This story is as true, I declare,
As is the Book of Lancelot of the Lake,
Which women hold in very great reverence.
Now will I turn again to my subject matter.
A fox, full of sly iniquity,
That in the grove had dwelled three years,
By exalted imagination predestined,
The same night through the hedges broke
Into the yard where the handsome Chauntecleer
Was accustomed, and also his wives, to repair; 
And in a bed of cabbages he lay quietly
Until it had passed 9 a.m. of the day,
Waiting his time on Chauntecleer to fall,
As habitually do all these homicides
That in ambush lie to murder men.
O false murderer, lurking in thy den!
O new Judas Iscariot, new Genylon,
False deceiver, O Greek Synon,
That brought all Troy completely to sorrow!
O Chauntecleer, cursed be that morning
That thou flew from the beams into that yard!
Thou were very well warned by thy dreams
That that same day was perilous to thee; 
But what God knows beforehand must by necessity be,
According to the opinion of certain scholars.
Take witness of him that is a thoroughly competent scholar,
That in the university is great disagreement
In this matter, and great disputation,
And has been (disputed) by a hundred thousand men.
But I can not separate the valid and invalid arguments
As can the holy doctor Augustine,
Or Boethius, or the Bishop Bradwardyn,
Whether God's worthy foreknowledge
Constrains me by need to do a thing --
"Need" I call simple necessity --
Or else, if free choice be granted to me
To do that same thing, or do it not,
Though God knew it before I was born; 
Or if his knowledge constrains not at all
But by conditional necessity. 
I will not have to do with such matter; 
My tale is of a cock, as you may hear,
Who took his counsel from his wife, with sorrow,
To walk in the yard upon that morning
That he had dreamed that dream of which I told you.
Women's counsels are very often fatal; 
Woman's counsel brought us first to woe
And made Adam to go from Paradise,
Where he was very merry and well at ease.
But because I know not to whom it might displease,
If I would blame counsel of women,
Pass over, for I said it as a joke.
Read authors, where they treat of such matter,
And what they say of women you may hear.
These are the cock's words, and not mine; 
I know no harm of any woman divine. 
Fair in the sand, to bathe her merrily,
Lies Pertelote, and all her sisters by her,
In the sunshine, and Chauntecleer so noble
Sang more merrily than the mermaid in the sea
(For Phisiologus says surely
How they sing well and merrily).
And so befell that, as he cast his eye
On a butterfly among the cabbages,
He was aware of this fox, that lay very low.
Not at all then did he want to crow,
But cried straightway, "Cock! cock!" and up he leaped
As one that was frightened in his heart.
For naturally a beast desires to flee
From his natural opponent, if he may see it,
Though he never before had seen it with his eye.
This Chauntecleer, when he did espy him,
He would have fled, but that the fox straightway
Said, "Gentle sir, alas, where will you go?
Are you afraid of me who is your friend?
Now, certainly, I would be worse than a fiend,
If I to you would do harm or villainy!
I am not come to spy on your secrets,
But truly, the cause of my coming
Was only to hear how you sing.
For truly, you have as merry a voice
As has any angel that is in heaven.
Therewith you have in music more feeling
Than had Boethius, or any that knows how to sing.
My lord your father -- God bless his soul! --
And also your mother, of her graciousness,
Have been in my house to my great pleasure; 
And certainly, sir, I would very eagerly please you.
But, insofar as men speak of singing, I will say --
As I may well have use of my two eyes --
Except for you, I heard never man so sing
As did your father in the morning.
Certainly, it came from the heart, all that he sang.
And to make his voice the more strong,
He would so exert himself that with both his eyes
He had to wink, so loud he would cry,
And stand on his tiptoes simultaneously,
And stretch forth his neck long and small.
And also he was of such sound judgment 
That there was no man in any region
That might pass him in song or wisdom.
I have well read in `Dan Burnel the Ass,'
Among his verses, how there was a cock,
Because a priest's son gave him a knock
Upon his leg while he was young and foolish,
He made him lose his benefice.
But certainly, there is no comparison
Between the wisdom and discretion
Of your father and of his subtlety.
Now sing, sir, for Saint Charity; 
Let's see; can you imitate your father?"
This Chauntecleer began to beat his wings,
As one that could not espy his treason,
He was so ravished with his flattery.
Alas, you lords, many a false flatterer
Is in your courts, and many a sycophant,
Who please you well more, by my faith,
Than he who says the truth unto you.
Read Ecclesiastes about flattery; 
Beware, you lords, of their treachery.
This Chauntecleer stood high upon his toes,
Stretching his neck, and held his eyes closed,
And began to crow loud for the occasion.
And dan Russell the fox leaped up at once,
And grabbed Chauntecleer by the throat,
And carried him on his back toward the woods,
For yet there was no one that pursued him.
O destiny, that may not be escaped!
Alas, that Chauntecleer flew from the beams!
Alas, his wife took no heed of dreams!
And on a Friday befell all this misfortune.
O Venus, who art goddess of pleasure,
Since this Chauntecleer was thy servant,
And in thy service did all his power,
More for delight than to people the world,
Why wouldest thou allow him to die on thy day?
O Gaufred, dear supreme master,
Who when thy worthy king Richard was slain
By shot of an arrow, complained his death so grievously,
Why had I not now thy wisdom and thy learning,
To chide the Friday, as you did?
For on a Friday, truly, he was slain.
Then would I show you how that I could complain
For Chanticleer's dread and for his pain.
Certainly, such cry nor lamentation
Was never made by ladies when Ilion (Troy)
Was won, and Pirrus with his drawn sword,
When he had seized king Priam by the beard,
And slain him, as the Aeneid tells us,
As all the hens made in the yard,
When they had seen the sight of Chauntecleer.
But supremely dame Pertelote shrieked
Much louder than did Hasdrubales' wife,
When her husband had lost his life
And the Romans had burned Carthage.
She was so full of torment and of rage
That willfully into the fire she leaped
And burned herself with a steadfast heart.
O woeful hens, exactly so you cried
As when Nero burned the city
Of Rome senators' wives cried 
Because their husbands lost all their lives --
Without guilt this Nero has them slain.
Now will I turn to my tale again.
This poor widow and also her two daughters
Heard these hens cry and make woe,
And out at doors they rush anon,
And see the fox go toward the grove,
And carried the cock away upon his back,
And cried, "Help! Help and alas!
Ha, ha! The fox!" and after him they ran,
And also with staves many another man.
Ran Colle our dog, and Talbot and Gerland,
And Malkyn, with a distaff in her hand; 
Ran cow and calf, and also the very hogs,
So frightened for the barking of the dogs
And shouting of the men and women also
They ran so hard that they thought their hearts would break.
They yelled as fiends do in hell; 
The ducks cried as if men would them kill; 
The geese for fear flew over the trees; 
Out of the hive came the swarm of bees.
So hideous was the noise -- a, bless me! --
Certainly, he Jack Straw and his company
Never made shouts half so shrill
When they would any Fleming kill,
As that same day was made upon the fox.
They brought trumpets of brass, and of box-wood,
Of horn, of bone, in which they blew and puffed,
And with that they shrieked and they whooped.
It seemed as if heaven should fall.
Now, good men, I pray you all to listen:
Lo, how Fortune turns suddenly
The hope and pride also of her enemy!
This cock, that lay upon the fox's back,
In all his dread unto the fox he spoke,
And said, "Sir, if I were you,
Yet should I say, as God may help me,
`Turn again, all you proud churls!
May a true pestilence fall upon you!
Now I am come unto the wood's side; 
Despite all you could do, the cock shall here remain.
I will eat him, in faith, and that right away!'"
The fox answered, "In faith, it shall be done."
And as he spoke that word, all suddenly
This cock nimbly broke from his mouth,
And high upon a tree he quickly flew.
And when the fox saw that the cock was gone,
"Alas!" said he, "O Chauntecleer, alas!
I have to you," said he, "done offense,
In as much as I made you afraid
When I seized you and brought you out of the yard.
But, sir, I did it with no wicked intention.
Come down, and I shall tell you what I meant; 
I shall say the truth to you, as God may help me!"
"Nay then," said he, "I curse both of us two.
And first I curse myself, both blood and bones,
If thou trick me more often than once.
Thou shalt no more through thy flattery
Make me sing and close my eyes; 
For he that closes his eyes, when he should see,
All willfully, God let him never prosper!"
"Nay," said the fox, "but God give him misfortune,
Who is so indiscreet of governance
That he chatters when he should hold his peace."
Lo, such it is to be careless
And negligent, and trust on flattery.
But you who hold this tale a folly,
As of a fox, or of a cock and hen,
Take the morality, good men.
For Saint Paul says that all that is written,
Is written for our instruction, indeed; 
Take the fruit, and let the chaff be still.
Now, good God, if it be thy will,
As says my lord, make us all good men,
And bring us to his high bliss! Amen.
["Sir Nun's Priest," our Host said straightway,
"Blessed be thy buttocks, and every testicle!
This was a merry tale of Chanticleer.
But by my troth, if thou were a layman,
Thou would be an excellent copulator of fouls (rooster).
For if thou have as much desire as thou hast might,
Thou would have need of hens, as I think,
Yea, more than seven times seventeen.
See, what muscles has this gentle priest,
So big a neck, and such a large chest!
He looks like a sparrow-hauk with his eyes;
He needs not paint his complexion
With red dye nor with grain of Portugal.
Now, sir, may good fortune come to you for your tale!"
And after that he, with a very merry manner,
Said unto another, as you shall hear.]
