Our Host began to swear as if he was crazy;
"Alas!" said he, "by (Christ's) nails and by (His) blood!
This was a false churl and a false judge.
As shameful a death as heart can devise
Come to these judges and their advocates!
At any rate, this innocent maid is slain, alas!
Alas, too dearly she paid for her beauty!
Therefore I say that every day men may see
That gifts of Fortune and of Nature
Are cause of death to many a creature.
Her beauty was her death, I dare well say.
Alas, so pitifully as she was slain!
Of both gifts that I speak of now
Men have very often more harm than benefit.
But truly, mine own master dear,
This is a pitiful tale to hear.
But nonetheless, pass over; is does not matter.
I pray to God so save thy gentle body,
And also thy vessels for analyzing urine and thy flasks,
Thine ipocras, and also thy galiones (medicines),
And every container full of thy electuaries;
God bless them, and our lady Saint Mary!
As I may prosper, thou art a proper man,
And like a prelate, by Saint Ronyan!
Said I not well? I can not speak in technical terms;
But well I know thou makes mine heart to grieve so,
That I almost have caught a palpitation of the heart.
By corpus' bones! unless I have medicine,
Or else a draught of fresh and strong ale,
Or unless I hear right now a merry tale,
My heart is lost for pity of this maid.
Thou fair friend (rascal), thou Pardoner," he said,
"Tell us some mirth or comic tales right away."
"It shall be done," said he, "by Saint Ronyon!
But first," said he, "here at this ale stake (tavern sign)
I will both drink and eat of a cake."
But right away these gentlefolk began to cry,
"Nay, let him tell us of no ribaldry!
Tell us some moral thing, that we may learn
Some useful knowledge, and then will we gladly hear."
"I agree, indeed," said he, "but I must think
About some respectable thing while I drink."
</FONT>
"Gentlemen," he said, "in churches when I preach,
I take pains to have a loud voice,
And ring it out as round as goes a belle,
For I know all by rote that I tell.
My theme is always the same, and ever was --
'Greed is the root of all evil.'
"First I pronounce from whence I come,
And then my papal bulls I show, each and every one.
Our liege lord's seal on my letter of authorization,
I show that first, to protect my body,
So that no man be so bold, neither priest nor clerk,
To hinder me from (doing) Christ's holy work.
And after that then I tell forth my tales;
Indulgences of popes and of cardinals,
Of patriarchs and bishops I show,
And in Latin I speak a few words,
With which to add spice to my preaching,
And to stir them to devotion.
Then I show forth my long crystal stones,
Crammed full of rags and of bones --
Relics they are, as suppose they each one.
Then I have mounted in latten (brass-like alloy) a shoulder-bone
Which was of a holy Jew's sheep.
`Good men,' I say, `take heed of my words;
If this bone be washed in any well,
If cow, or calf, or sheep, or ox swell
That any worm has eaten, or worm stung,
Take water of that well and wash its tongue,
And it is whole right away; and furthermore,
Of pocks and of scab, and every sore
Every sheep shall be whole that of this well
Drinks a draft. Take heed also what I say:
If the householder who owns the beasts
Will every week, before the cock crows,
Fasting, drink of this well a draft,
As that same holy Jew taught our elders,
His beasts and his possessions shall multiply.
`And, sirs, it also heals jealousy;
For though a man be fallen in jealous rage,
Have his potage made with this water,
And he shall never more mistrust his wife,
Though he knew the truth of her misdeed,
Although she had taken two or three priests.
`Here is a mitten also, that you may see.
He that will put his hand in this mitten,
He shall have multiplying of his grain,
When he has sown, be it wheat or oats,
Providing that he offer pennies, or else fourpences.
`Good men and women, one thing I warn you:
If any person be in this church now
Who has done such horrible sin, that he 
Dare not, for shame, be confessed of it,
Or any woman, be she young or old,
Who has made her husband cuckold,
Such folk shall have no power nor no grace
To offer to my relics in this place.
And whoever finds himself out of such blame,
He will come up and offer in God's name,
And I will absolve him by the authority
Which by papal bull was granted to me.'
"By this trick have I won, year after year,
An hundred marks since I was pardoner.
I stand like a clerk in my pulpit,
And when the ignorant people are set down,
I preach as you have heard before
And tell a hundred more false tales.
Then I take pains to stretch forth the neck,
And east and west upon the people I nod,
As does a dove sitting on a barn.
My hands and my tongue go so quickly
That it is joy to see my business.
Of avarice and of such cursedness
Is all my preaching, to make them generous
To give their pennies, and namely unto me.
For my intention is only to make a profit,
And not at all for correction of sin.
I care not a bit, when they are buried,
Though their souls go picking blackberries! 
For certainly, many a sermon
Comes often times from an evil intention;
Some for pleasure of folk and flattery,
To be advanced by hypocrisy,
And some for vain glory, and some for hate.
For when I dare debate no other ways,
Then I will sting him with my sharp tongue
In preaching, so that he shall not escape
To be defamed falsely, if he
Has trespassed to my brethren or to me.
For though I tell not his proper name,
Men shall well know that it is the same,
By signs, and by other details.
Thus I repay folk who make trouble for us pardoners;
Thus I spit out my venom under hue
Of holinesses, to seem holy and true.
"But shortly my intention I will tell:
I preach of nothing but for greed.
Therefore my theme is yet, and ever was,
`Greed is the root of all evil.'
Thus I can preach against that same vice
Which I use, and that is avarice.
But though myself be guilty of that sin,
Yet I can make other folk to turn away
From avarice and bitterly to repent.
But that is not my principal intention;
I preach nothing but for greed.
Concerning this matter this ought to be enough.
"Then I tell them illustrative tales many a one
Of old stories from long time ago.
For ignorant people love old tales;
Such things they can well repeat and hold in memory. 
What, do you suppose, that while I can preach,
And win gold and silver because I teach,
That I will live in poverty voluntarily?
Nay, nay, I never thought it, truly!
For I will preach and beg in various lands;
I will not do any labor with my hands,
Nor make baskets and live thereby,
Because I will not beg idly.
I will imitate none of the apostles;
I will have money, wool, cheese, and wheat,
Although it were given by the poorest servant boy,
Or by the poorest widow in a village,
Even though her children should die of hunger.
Nay, I will drink liquor of the vine
And have a pretty wench in every town.
But listen, gentlemen, in conclusion:
Your desire is that I shall tell a tale.
Now I have drunk a draft of strong ale,
By God, I hope I shall tell you a thing
That shall, for good reason, be to your liking.
For though myself be a very vicious man,
Yet I can tell you a moral tale,
Which I am accustomed to preach in order to profit.
Now hold your peace! My tale I will begin."
</FONT>
In Flanders once was a company
Of young folk who practiced folly,
Such as debauchery, gambling, brothels, and taverns,
Where with harps, lutes, and guitars,
They dance and play at dice both day and night,
And also eat and drink beyond their capacity,
Through which they do the devil sacrifice
Within that devil's temple in cursed manner
By abominable excess.
Their oaths are so great and so damnable
That it is grisly to hear them swear.
Our blessed Lord's body they tore in pieces --
They thought that the Jews did not tear him enough --
And each of them laughed at the other's sin.
And right away then come dancing girls
Elegantly shaped and slim, and girls selling fruits,
Singers with harps, bawds, girls selling wafers,
Which are the very devil's officers
To kindle and blow the fire of lechery,
That is joined unto gluttony.
The Bible I take as my witness
That lechery is in wine and drunkenness.
Lo, how that drunken Lot, unnaturally,
Lay by his two daughters, unwittingly;
So drunk he was, he knew not what he did.
Herod, whoever should seek well the histories (would learn),
When he was filled with wine at his feast,
Right at his own table he gave his command
To slay John the Baptist, full guiltless.
Seneca says a good word, doubtless;
He says he can find no difference 
Between a man that is out of his mind
And a man that is drunk,
Except that madness, fallen in an evil person,
Lasts longer than does drunkenness.
O gluttony, full of cursedness!
O first cause of our ruin!
O origin of our damnation,
Until Christ had bought us with his blood again!
Lo, how dearly, shortly to say,
Was bought that same cursed villainy!
Corrupt was all this world for gluttony.
Adam our fader, and his wife also,
From Paradise to labor and to woe
Were driven for that vice, there is no doubt.
For while Adam fasted, as I read,
He was in Paradise; and when he
Ate of the forbidden fruit on the tree,
Immediately he was cast out to woe and pain.
O gluttony, on thee well we ought to complain!
O, if a man knew how many evils
Follow of excess and of gluttony,
He would be the more moderate
Of his diet, sitting at his table.
Alas, the short throat, the tender mouth,
Makes that east and west and north and south,
In earth, in air, in water, men work
To get a glutton dainty food and drink!
Of this matter, O Paul, well can thou treat
"Food unto belly, and belly also unto food,
God shall destroy both," as Paul says.
Alas, a foul thing it is, by my faith,
To say this word, and fouler is the deed,
When man so drinks of the white and red
That he makes his privy of his throat 
Through that same cursed excess.
The apostle weeping says full piteously,
"There walk many of whom I have told you --
I say it now weeping, with piteous voice --
They are enemies of Christ's cross,
Of which the end is death; belly is their god!"
O gut! O belly! O stinking bag,
Filled with dung and with corruption!
At either end of thee the sound is foul.
How great labor and cost it is to feed thee!
These cooks, how they pound, and strain, and grind,
And turn substance into outward appearance
To fulfill all thy gluttonous desire!
Out of the hard bones they knock 
The marrow, for they throw nothing away
That may go through the gullet softly and sweetly.
Of seasonings of leaf, and bark, and root
Shall his sauce be made for delight,
To make him yet a newer appetite.
But, certainly, he who habitually seeks such delicacies
Is dead, while he lives in those vices.
A lecherous thing is wine, and drunkenness
Is full of striving and of wretchedness.
O drunken man, disfigured is thy face,
Sour is thy breath, foul art thou to embrace,
And through thy drunken nose the sound seems 
As though thou said always "Sampson, Sampson!"
And yet, God knows, Sampson never drank any wine.
Thou fallest like a stuck pig;
Thy tongue is lost, and all thy care for decency,
For drunkenness is truly the sepulcher
Of man's wit and his discretion.
In whom drink has domination
He can keep no secrets; there is no doubt.
Now guard yourself from the white and from the red,
And namely from the white wine of Lepe
That is for sale in Fishstreet or in Cheapside.
This wine of Spain creeps subtly
Into other wines, growing near by,
Of which there rise such bodily vapors
That when a man has drunk three drafts,
And supposes that he is at home in Cheapside,
He is in Spain, right at the town of Lepe --
Not at La Rochelle, nor at Bordeaux town --
And then will he say "Sampson, Sampson!"
But listen, gentlemen, one word, I pray you,
That all the great deeds, I dare say,
Of victories in the Old Testament,
Through true God, who is omnipotent,
Were done in abstinence and in prayer.
Look in the Bible, and there you can learn it.
Consider how Attila, the great conqueror,
Died in his sleep, with shame and dishonor,
Bleeding ever at his nose in drunkenness.
A captain should live in sobriety.
And beyond all this, consider right well
What was commanded unto Lamuel --
Not Samuel, but Lamuel, I say;
Read the Bible, and find it explicitly
About giving wine to those that have the duty of doing justice.
No more of this, for it may well suffice.
And now that I have spoken of gluttony,
Now I will forbid you gambling.
Dicing is the true mother of lies,
And of deceit, and cursed perjuries,
Blasphemy of Christ, manslaughter, and waste also
Of possessions and of time; and furthermore,
It is a disgrace and contrary to honor
To be considered a common dice player.
And ever the higher he is of estate,
The more is he considered abandoned (to shame).
If a prince plays at dicing,
In all governance and policy
He is, by common opinion,
Held the less in reputation.
Stilboun, who was a wise ambassador,
Was sent to Corinth in very great honor
From Sparta to make their alliance.
And when he came, it happened, by chance,
That all the greatest men that were of that land,
Playing at dice he found them.
For which, as soon as it could be,
He stole home again to his country,
And said, "There I will not lose my reputation,
Nor will I take on me so great infamy,
To ally you unto any dice-players.
Send other wise ambassadors;
For, by my troth, I would rather die
Than I should ally you to dice-players.
For you, that are so glorious in honors,
Shall not ally yourselves with dice-players
By my will, nor by my negotiation."
This wise philosopher, thus said he.
Consider also that to the king Demetrius
The king of Parthia, as the book tells us,
Sent him a pair of dice of gold in scorn,
Because he had played at dicing before that;
For which he held his glory or his renown
At no value or esteem.
Lords may find other sorts of play
Respectable enough to pass the time.
Now will I speak of oaths false and great
A word or two, as old books treat them.
Great swearing is an abominable thing,
And false swearing is yet more worthy of reproof.
The high God forbad swearing at al,
Witness on Matthew; but in special
Of swearing says the holy Jeremiah,
"Thou shall swear truly thine oaths, and not lie,
And in judgement and also in righteousness";
But idle swearing is a cursed thing.
Behold and see that in the first three
Of high God's honorable commandments,
How the second of his commands is this:
"Take not my name in vain nor amiss."
Lo, he forbids such swearing rather
Than homicide or many a cursed thing;
I say that, so far as order is concerned, thus it stands;
He who understands his commandments knows this,
How that is the second command of God.
And furthermore, I will tell thee flatly
That vengeance shall not part from his house
Who of his oaths is too excessive.
"By God's precious heart," and "By his nails,"
And "By the blood of Christ that is in Hales Abbey,
Seven is my number, and thine is five and three!"
"By God's arms, if thou falsely play,
This dagger shall go throughout thy heart!" --
This fruit comes of the two cursed dice,
Perjury, anger, falseness, homicide.
Now, for the love of Christ, who for us died,
Leave your oaths, both great and small.
But, sirs, now will I tell forth my tale.
These three rioters of whom I tell,
Long before prime rang of any bell,
Had set themselves in a tavern to drink,
And as they sat, they heard a bell clink
Before a corpse, which was carried to its grave.
The one of them did call to his servant:
"Go quickly," he said, "and ask at once
What corpse is this that passes by here;
And see that thou report his name correctly."
"Sir," said this boy, "that is not at all necessary;
It was told me two hours before you came here.
He was, indeed, an old fellow of yours,
And suddenly he was slain last night,
Completely drunk, as he sat on his bench upright.
There came a stealthy thief men call Death,
Who slays all the people in this country,
And with his spear he struck his heart in two,
And went his way without more words.
He has slain a thousand (during) this pestilence.
And, master, before you come in his presence,
It seems to me that it would be necessary
To beware of such an adversary.
Always be ready to meet him;
Thus taught me my mother; I say no more."
"By Saint Mary!" said this tavern-keeper,
"The child says truth, for he has slain this year,
Over a mile from here, within a great village,
Both man and woman, child, and laborer, and servant boy;
I suppose his habitation is there.
It would be great wisdom to be forewarned,
Before he did a man any harm."
"Yea, God's arms!" said this rioter,
"Is it such peril to meet with him?
I shall seek him by path-way and also by street (everywhere),
I make a vow to God's honorable bones!
Listen, fellows, we three are all agreed;
Let each of us hold up his hand to other,
And each of us become the others' brother,
And we will slay this false traitor Death.
He shall be slain, he who slays so many,
By God's dignity, before it be night!"
Together have these three pledged their troths
To live and die each of them for other,
As though he were his own born brother.
And up they leaped, all drunken in this rage,
And forth they go towards that village
Of which the tavern-keeper had spoken before.
And many a grisly oath then have they sworn,
And Christ's blessed body they tore to pieces --
Death shall be dead, if they can catch him!
When they have gone not fully half a mile,
Right as they would have stepped over a fence,
An old and poor man met with them.
This old man full meekly greeted them,
And said thus, "Now, lords, may God look after you!"
The proudest of these three rioters
Answered in reply, "What, churl, bad luck to you!
Why art thou all wrapped up except for thy face?
Why live thou so long in such old age?"
This old man did look in his face,
And said thus: "Because I can not find
A man, though I walked to India,
Neither in city nor in any village,
That would change his youth for my age;
And therefore I must have my age still,
As long a time as it is God's will.
Nor Death, alas, will not have my life.
Thus I walk, like a restless wretch,
And on the ground, which is my mother's gate,
I knock with my staff, both early and late,
And say `Dear mother, let me in!
Lo how I waste away, flesh, and blood, and skin!
Alas, when shall my bones be at rest?
Mother, with you would I exchange my strongbox
That in my chamber long time has been,
Yea, for an hair shirt to wrap me!'
But yet to me she will not do that favor,
For which full pale and withered is my face.
"But, sirs, to you it is no courtesy
To speak rudeness to an old man,
Unless he trespass in word or else in deed.
In Holy Writ you may yourself well read:
`In the presence of an old man, gray upon his head,
You should rise;' therefore I give you advice,
Do no harm now unto an old man,
No more than you would want men to do to you
In old age, if you live so long.
And God be with you, wherever you walk or ride!
I must go thither where I have to go."
"Nay, old churl, by God, thou shall not so,"
Said this other dice-player quickly;
"Thou depart not so quickly, by Saint John!
Thou spoke right now of that same traitor Death.
That slays all our friends in this country.
Have here my pledge, as thou art his spy,
Tell where he is or thou shall pay for it,
By God and by the holy sacrament!
For truly thou art in league with him
To slay us young folk, thou false thief!"
"Now, sirs," said he, "if you are so eager
To find Death, turn up this crooked way,
For in that grove I left him, by my faith,
Under a tree, and there he will wait;
He will not in any way hide himself because of your boast.
Do you see that oak? Right there you shall find him.
God save you, He who redeemed mankind,
And amend you!" Thus said this old man;
And every one of these rioters ran
Until he came to that tree, and there they found
Of fine round florins of coined gold
Well nigh eight bushels, as they thought.
No longer then after Death they sought,
But each of them was so glad of that sight,
Because the florins are so faire and bright,
That they set themselves down by this precious hoard.
The worst of them, he spoke the first word.
"Brethren," he said, "take heed of what I say;
My wit is great, though I jest and play.
Fortune has given this treasure unto us 
In mirth and jollity to live our life,
And as easily as it comes, so will we spend it.
Ah, God's precious dignity! Who would have supposed
To-day that we should have such good fortune?
But if this gold could be carried from this place
Home to my house, or else unto yours --
For well you know that all this gold is ours --
Then we would be in great happiness.
But truly, it may not be (done) by day.
Men would say that we were arrant thieves,
And for our own treasure have us hanged.
This treasure must be carried by night
As wisely and as slyly as it can be.
Wherefore I advise that among us all straws
Be drawn, and let's see where the lot will fall;
And he who has the shortest straw with happy heart 
Shall run to the town, and that very quickly,
And very secretly bring us bread and wine.
And two of us shall carefully guard
This treasure well; and if he will not tarry,
When it is night, we will carry this treasure,
By mutual agreement, where we think best."
That one of them brought the straws in his fist,
And commanded them to draw and see where it will fall;
And it fell on the youngest of them all,
And forth toward the town he went right away.
And as soon as he was gone,
The one of them spoke thus unto that other:
"Thou knowest well thou art my sworn brother;
Thy profit will I tell thee straightway.
Thou knowest well that our fellow is gone.
And here is gold, and that a full great quantity,
That shall be divided among us three.
But nevertheless, if I can arrange things so
That it were divided among us two,
Had I not done a good turn to thee?"
That other answered, "I know not how that can be.
He knows that the gold is with us two;
What shall we do? What shall we say to him?"
"Shall it be (our) secret plan?" said the first scoundrel,
"And I shall tell in a few words 
What we shall do, and bring it well about."
"I agree," said that other, "without doubt,
That, by my troth, I will not betray thee."
"Now," said the first, "thou knowest well we are two,
And two of us shall be stronger than one.
Look, when he has set down, right away 
Arise as though thou would with him play,
And I shall stab him through the two sides 
While thou struggle with him as in game,
And with thy dagger see that thou do the same;
And then shall all this gold be divided,
My dear friend, between me and thee.
Then we both can fulfill all our desires,
And play at dice just as we wish,"
And thus these two scoundrels are agreed
To slay the third, as you have heard me say.
This youngest, who went to the town,
Very often in heart he rolls up and down
The beauty of these florins new and bright.
"O Lord!" he said, "if it would be that I might
Have all this treasure to myself alone,
There is no man that lives under the throne
Of God that should live so merrily as I!"
And at the last the fiend, our enemy,
Put in his thought that he should buy poison,
With which he might slay his two fellows;
Because the fiend found him in such a manner of living
That he had leave bring him to sorrow.
For this was utterly his full intention,
To slay them both and never to repent.
And forth he goes, no longer would he tarry,
Into the town, unto an apothecary,
And prayed him that he would sell him 
Some poison, that he might kill his rats;
And also there was a polecat in his yard,
That, as he said, had slain his capons,
And he would gladly revenge himself, if he could,
On vermin that ruined him by night.
The apothecary answered, "And thou shall have
A thing that, as God may save my soul,
In all this world there is no creature
That has eaten or drunk of this concoction
Only so much as the amount of a seed of wheat,
That he shall not immediately lose his life;
Yea, he shall die, and that in less time
Than thou will go at a walk but only a mile,
This poison is so strong and violent."
This cursed man has in his hand taken 
This poison in a box, and then he ran
Into the next street unto a man,
And borrowed [of] him three large bottles,
And in the two he poured his poison;
The third he kept clean for his drink.
For all the night he intended to work
In carrying of the gold out of that place.
And when this rioter, bad luck to him,
Had filled his three big bottles with wine,
He goes back again to his fellows.
What needs it to preach of it more?
For right as they had planned his death before,
Right so they have him slain, and that immediately.
And when this was done, thus spoke that one:
"Now let us sit and drink, and make us merry,
And afterward we will bury his body."
And with that word it happened to him, by chance,
To take the bottle where the poison was,
And drank, and gave his fellow drink also,
For which straightway they died, both of the two.
But certainly, I suppose that Avicenna
Wrote never in any authoritative book, nor in any chapter,
More wondrous symptoms of poisoning
Than had these two wretches, before their ending.
Thus ended are these two homicides,
And also the false poisoner as well.
O cursed sin of all cursedness!
O treacherous homicide, O wickedness!
O gluttony, lechery, and dicing!
Thou blasphemer of Christ with churlish speech
And great oaths, out of habit and out of pride!
Alas, mankind, how may it happen
That to thy creator, who made thee
And with his precious heart's blood redeemed thee,
Thou art so false and so unnatural, alas?
Now, good men, God forgive you your trespass,
And guard yourselves from the sin of avarice!
My holy pardon can cure you all,
Providing that you offer gold coins or silver pennies,
Or else silver brooches, spoons, rings.
Bow your head under this holy papal bull!
Come up, you wives, offer some of your wool!
Your names I enter here in my roll immediately;
Into the bliss of heaven you shall go.
I absolve you, by my high power,
You who will offer, as clean and also as clear (of sin)
As you were born. -- And lo, sirs, thus I preach.
And Jesus Christ, that is our souls' physician,
So grant you to receive his pardon,
For that is best; I will not deceive you.
But, sirs, one word I forgot in my tale:
I have relics and pardons in my bag,
As fine as any man in England,
Which were given to me by the pope's hand.
If any of you will, of devotion,
Offer and have my absolution,
Come forth straightway, and kneel down here,
And meekly receive my pardon;
Or else take pardon as you travel,
All new and fresh at every mile's end,
Providing that you offer, again and again,
Gold coins or silver pennies, which are good and true.
It is an honor to every one that is here
That you may have a pardoner with sufficient power
To absolve you in the countryside as you ride,
For accidents that may happen.
Perhaps there may fall one or two
Down off his horse and break his neck in two.
Look what a safeguard is it to you all
That I happen to be in your fellowship,
Who can absolve you, both more and less (every one),
When the soul shall from the body pass.
I advise that our Host here shall begin,
For he is most enveloped in sin.
Come forth, sir Host, and offer first right now,
And thou shall kiss the relics every one,
Yea, for a fourpence coin! Unbuckle thy purse right now."
"Nay, nay!" he said, "then I will have Christ's curse!
Let it be," he said, "it shall not be, as I may prosper!
Thou would make me kiss thine old underpants,
And swear it was a relic of a saint,
Though it were stained by thy fundament!
But, by the cross that Saint Helen found,
I would I had thy testicles in my hand
Instead of relics or a container for relics.
Have them cut off, I will help thee carry them;
They shall be enshrined in a hog's turd!"
This Pardoner answered not a word;
So angry he was, no word would he say.
"Now," said our Host, "I will no longer joke
With thee, nor with any other angry man."
But immediately the worthy Knight began,
When he saw that all the people laughed,
"No more of this, for it is right enough!
Sir Pardoner, be glad and merry of cheer;
And you, sir Host, who are so dear to me,
I pray you that you kiss the Pardoner.
And Pardoner, I pray thee, draw thyself nearer,
And, as we did, let us laugh and play."
At once they kissed, and rode forth their way.
