By the time that the Manciple had his tale all ended,
The sun from the meridian was descended
So low that he was not, to my sight,
More than nine and twenty degrees in altitude.
Four of the clock it was then, as I suppose,
For eleven feet, or little more or less,
My shadow was there at that same time,
Of such feet as if my height were divided
Into six feet equal in size.
Therewith the moon's exaltation --
I mean Libra -- steadily ascended
As we were entering at edge of a village;
For which our Host, since he was accustomed to guide,
On this occasion, our jolly company,
Said in this manner: "Gentlemen, every one,
Now we lack no tales more than one.
Fulfilled is my plan and my decree;
I believe that we have heard from each social class;
Almost fulfilled is all my governance.
I pray to God, give right good luck to him,
Who tells this tale to us pleasingly.
"Sire priest," said he, "art thou a vicar?
Or art thou a parson? Tell the truth, by thy faith!
Be whatever thou may be, break thou not our rules;
For every man, save thou, has told his tale.
Unbuckle and show us what is in thy bag;
For truly, it seems to me from your appearance
Thou shouldest well conclude a long discourse.
Tell us a fictional tale right now, for cock's bones!"
This Parson answered, immediately,
"Thou gettest no fiction told by me,
For Paul, who writes unto Timothy,
Reproves them that abandon truthfulness
And tell fictional tales and such wretched things.
Why should I sow chaff out of my fist,
When I can sow wheat, if I so wish?
For which I say, if you want to hear
Morality and virtuous subject matter,
And providing that you will give me your attention,
I will very gladly, to Christ's reverence,
Provide you with permissible pleasure, insofar as I can.
But trust well, I am a Southern man;
I can not recite `rum, ram, ruf,' letter by letter,
And, God knows, rime I consider but little better;
And therefore, if you wish -- I will not deceive you --
I will yow tell a merry tale in prose
To conclude all this festivity and make an end.
And Jesus, for his grace, send me wit
To show you the way, in this journey,
Of that same perfect glorious pilgrimage
That is called Jerusalem celestial.
And if you agree, I shall right now
Begin my tale, for which I pray you
To tell your decision; I can say nothing better.
"But nonetheless, this meditation
I put it ever subject to correction
By clerks, for I am not learned in texts;
I take from them only the meaning, trust well.
Therefore I make this declaration
That I will be subject to correction."
Upon this word we have quickly assented,
For, as it seemed, it was the best to do --
To end in some virtuous subject matter,
And to give him time and attention,
And told our Host he should to him say
That we all pray him to tell his tale.
Our Host had the words for us all;
"Sire priest," said he, "now may good fortune come to you!
Tell," said he, "your meditation.
But make haste; the sun is about to go down;
Be fruitful, and that in little time,
And to do well God send you his grace!
Say what you wish, and we will gladly hear."
And with that word he said in this manner.
ALIGN=top></A></LEFT> Texts on this page prepared and maintained by L. D. Benson <A HREF="mailto:ldb@wjh.harvard.edu">(ldb@wjh.harvard.edu)</A> 
