There was, as Titus Livius tells,
A knight who was called Virginius,
Filled with honor and with worthiness,
And having powerful friends, and great wealth.
This knight had a daughter by his wife;
No more children had he in all his life.
Fair was this maid in excellent beauty
Above every person that one may see;
For Nature has with her greatest diligence
Formed her in such great excellence,
As though she would say, "Lo! I, Nature,
Thus can I form and paint a creature,
When I wish; who can counterfeit my work?
Not Pygmalion, though he always forge and beat,
Or carve, or paint; for I dare well say
Apelles  or Zeuxis, should work in vain
Either to carve, or paint, or forge, or beat,
If they presumed to imitate me.
For He who is the principal creator
Has appointed me his Chief Deputy,
To form and paint earthly creatures
Right as I wish, and in my control is each thing 
Under the moon, which may grow less or grow larger,
And nothing at all will I ask for my work;
My lord and I are fully in agreement.
I made her to the worship of my lord;
So do I all my other creatures,
Whatever complexion they have or whatever shapes."
It seems to me that Nature would say thus.
This maid was twelve years of age and two,
In whom Nature had such delight.
For just as she can paint a lily white,
And a rose red, just so with such pigments
Has she painted this noble creature,
Before she was born, upon her noble limbs,
Where such colors should rightly be; 
And Phebus has dyed her great tresses
Resembling the rays of his burnished sunbeams.
And if her beauty was excellent,
A thousand times more virtuous was she.
In her there lacked no characteristic
That is to be praised by (one with) sound moral judgement.
As well in spirit as in body chaste was she,
For which she flourished in virginity
With all humility and abstinence,
With all temperance and patience,
With moderation also in demeanor and dress.
She was always discreet in conversation;
Though she was wise as Pallas, I dare say,
Her manner of speaking was also very womanly and plain,
No pretentious terms had she
To seem wise, but in accordance with her rank in life
She spoke, and all her words, long speeches and brief,
In accord with virtue and nobility.
Modest she was in maidenly modesty,
Constant in heart, and ever diligent
To keep herself away from idle sluggishness.
Bacchus had no mastery of her mouth at all;
For wine and youth does increase (the power of) Venus,
As if men would cast oil or grease into a fire.
And of her own moral strength, of her own free choice,
She has very often pretended to be ill,
Because she wanted to flee the company
Where there was likely to be talk of folly,
As is at feasts, revels, and at dances,
That provide opportunities for flirtations.
Such things make children to be
Too soon ripe and bold, as anyone can see,
Which is very perilous and has been since long ago,
For all too soon may she learn the lore
Of boldness, when she is grown to be a wife.
And you mistresses, in your old age,
Who have lords' daughters in governance,
Do not take of my words any displeasure.
Think that you are set in charge 
Of lords' daughters only for two things:
Either because you have kept your chastity,
Or else you have fallen into frailty,
And know very well the tricks of the trade,
And have fully renounced such misconduct
For evermore; therefore, for Christ's sake,
Look that you do not desisit from teaching them virtue.
A thief of venison, who has abandoned
His greedy appetite and all his old craft,
Can guard a forest better than any other man.
Now guard well, for if you want (to do it), you can.
Take good care that you assent unto no vice,
Lest you be damned for your wicked intent;
For whoever does so, is a traitor, certainly.
And pay attention to what I shall say:
Of all betrayals the supreme wickedness
Is when a person betrays innocence.
You fathers and you mothers also as well,
If you have children, be it one or more,
Yours is the responsibility for all their supervision,
While they are under your governance.
Beware, lest by example of your (manner of) living,
Or by your negligence in chastising,
That they should perish; for I dare well say
If they do, you shall dearly pay for it.
Under a soft and negligent shepherd 
The wolf has many a sheep and lamb torn to pieces.
Let one ensample sufficefor the present,
For I must turn again to my subject.
This maiden, of whom I will narrate this tale,
So guarded herself she needed no governess
For in her manner of life maidens might read,
As in a book, every good word or deed
That is proper to a virtuous maiden,
She was so prudent and so filled with good.
For which sprang out all around the fame,
Both of her beauty and her goodness widespread,
So that throughout that land they praised her everyone
Who loved virtue, save Envy alone,
Who is sorry of other men's prosperity
And is glad of his sorrow and his misery.
(The Doctor [St. Augustine] makes this description.)
This maid upon a day went in the town
Toward a temple, with her mother dear,
As is the manner of young maidens.
Now was there then a justice in that town,
Who was governor of that region.
And it so happened that this judge cast his eyes 
Upon this maid, considering her very intently,
As she passed by where this judge stood.
Immediately his heart changed and his mood,
So was he caught by the beauty of this maid,
And to himself very secretly he said,
"This maid shall be mine, despite what any man (may do)!"
Immediately. the fiend ran into his heart,
And taught him suddenly that he by trickery 
Could win the maiden to his purpose.
For certainly, not by any force nor by any bribery,
He thought, would he be able to succeed;
For she had powerful friends, and also she
Was confirmed in such supreme goodness
That he knew well he could never win her 
And make her sin with her body.
For which, after great deliberation,
He sent for a churl, who was in the town,
Whom he knew for trickery and for boldness.
This judge unto this churl his tale has told
Secretly, and made him swear 
He should tell it to no creature,
And if he did, he should lose his head.
When this cursed plot was agreed upon
Glad was this judge, and made much of him (the churl),
And gave him precious and expensive gifts.
When all their conspiracy was planned
In great detail, how his lechery
Should be accomplished very subtly,
As you shall later hear it clearly,
Home goes the churl, who is called Claudius.
This false judge, who is called Apius,
(Such was his name, for this is no fable,
But known for a noteworthy historical fact;
The substance of it is true, beyond doubt),
This false judge goes now fast about
Hastening his delight all that he can.
And so it happened soon after, on a certain day,
This false judge, as the story tells us,
As he was accustomed, sat in his court,
And gave his judgements upon various cases.
This false churl came forth at a very rapid pace,
And said, "Lord, if it be your will,
Do me justice concerning this piteous formal complaint,
In which I complain about Virginius;
And if he will say it is not thus,
I will prove it, and find good evidence,
That what my formal complaint will express is truth."
The judge answered, "Of this, in his absence,
I can not give definitive judgment.
Let him be called, and I will gladly hear (the case);
Thou shalt have all justice, and no wrong here."
Virginius came to learn the judge's will,
And right away this cursed complaint was read;
The substance of it was as you shall hear:
"To you, my lord, Sir Apius so dear,
Your poor servant Claudius shows
How a knight, called Virginius,
Against the law, against all equity,
Expressly against my will, holds 
My servant, who is my slave by right,
Who was stolen from my house upon one night,
While she was very young; this will I prove
By evidence, lord, providing that you be not displeased.
She is not his daughter, whatever he may say.
Therefore to you, my lord judge, I pray,
Yield me my slave, if it be your will."
Lo, this was all the substance of his complaint.
Virginius began to look upon the churl,
Hastily, before he finished telling his tale,
And would have proven it as a knight should (by battle),
And also by the evidence of many a person,
That all that his adversary said was false,
This cursed judge would not at all delay,
Nor hear one word more from Virginius,
But gave his judgment, and said thus:
"I decide that this churl should have his slave right now;
Thou shalt no longer keep her in thine house.
Go bring her forth, and put her in our guardianship.
The churl shall have his slave, this I decree."
And when this worthy knight Virginius
Because of the verdict of this justice Apius
By force had to give his dear daughter
Unto the judge, to live in lechery,
He goes home, and sat himself in his hall,
And immediately had his dear daughter called,
And with a face as dead as cold ashes 
Upon her humble face he did behold,
With a father's pity stabbing through his heart,
Although he would not deviate from his purpose.
"Daughter," said he, "Virginia, by thy name,
There are two ways, either death or shame,
That thou most suffer; alas, that I was born!
For never thou deservedest for whatever reason
To die by a sword or by a knife.
O dear daughter, ender of my life,
Whom I have nurured with such pleasure
That thou were never out of my thoughts!
O daughter, who art my greatest woe,
And in my life my greatest joy also,
O gem of chastity, in patience
Take thou thy death, for this is my decision.
For love, and not for hate, thou must be dead;
My piteous hand must smite off thy head.
Alas, that ever Apius saw thee!
For that reason he has falsely judged thee to-day" --
And told her the whole business, as you before
Have heard; there is no need to tell it again.
"O mercy, dear father!" said this maid,
And with that word she both her arms laid
About his neck, as she was accustomed to do.
The tears burst out of her two eyes,
And said, "Good father, must I dye?
Is there no grace, is there no remedy?"
"No, certainly, dear daughter mine," said he.
"Then give me time, father mine," said she,
"To lament my death for a little while;
For, truly, Jeptha gave his daughter grace
To lament, before he slew her, alas!
And, God knows it,  her trespass was nothing,
Except that she ran first to see her father,
To welcome him with great solemnity."
And with that word immediately she fell in a swoon,
And afterwards, when her swooning is gone,
She rises up, and to her father said,
"Blessed be God that I shall die a maid!
Give me my death, before I have dishonor;
Do with your child your will, in God's name!"
And with that word she prayed him repeatedly
That with his sword he would smite gently;
And with that word down she fell in a swoon.
Her father, with very sorrowful heart and will,
Struck off her head, and by the hair siezed it,
And he did present it to the judge,
As he sat yet rendering judgements in court.
And when the judge saw it, as says the story,
He ordered [his men] to take him and hang him at once;
But right away a thousand people burst in,
To save the knight, for compassion and for pity,
For the false wickedness was known.
The people immediately suspected in this matter,
Because of the manner of the churl's claim,
That it was by the conspiring of Apius;
They knew well that he was lecherous.
For which unto this Apius they go
And cast him in a prison straightway,
Where he slew himself; and Claudius,
Who was servant unto this Apius,
Was condemned to hang upon a tree,
Except that Virginius, of his pity,
So prayed for him (Claudius) that he was exiled;
And also, certainly, he had been tricked (by Apius).
The remnant were hanged, high ranking and low,
Who were accessories to this crime.
Here may men see how sin has its reward.
Beware, for no man knows whom God will smite
In any rank, nor in what sort of way;
The worm of conscience may tremble for fear
Because of a wicked life, though it so secret be
That no man knows about it but God and he.
For be he ignorant man, or else learned,
He knows not how soon he shall be terrified.
Therefore I advise you to take this counsel:
Abandon sin, before sin abandons you.
ALIGN=top></A></LEFT> Texts on this page prepared and maintained by L. D. Benson <A HREF="mailto:ldb@wjh.harvard.edu">(ldb@wjh.harvard.edu)</A> 
