Oh Lord, our Lord, how marvelous thy name 
Is spread in this large world -- said she --
For not only thy precious praise
Is performed by men of dignity,
But by the mouths of children thy goodness
Is made known, for on the breast sucking
Sometimes they show thy praise.
Therefore in praise, as I best know how or can,
Of thee and of the white lily flour
That bore thee, and is a maid always,
To tell a story I will do my labor;
Not that I may increase her honor,
For she herself is honor and the root
Of goodness, next to her Son, and soul's remedy.
Oh mother Maiden, Oh generous maiden and Mother!
Oh bush unburned, burning in Moses' sight,
That ravished down from the Deity,
Through thy humility, the Ghost that alighted in thee, 
By whose power, when he illuminated thy heart,
The Father's Wisdom was conceived,
Help me to tell it in thy reverence!
Lady, thy goodness, thy magnificence,
Thy virtue and thy great humility
There can no tongue express in (the language of) any science;
For sometimes, Lady, ere men pray to thee,
Thou goest before because of thy kindliness,
And gettest us the light, by thy prayer,
To guide us unto thy Son so dear.
My ability is so weak, Oh blissful Queen,
To declare thy great worthiness
That I can not sustain the weight;
But as a child of twelve months old, or less,
That can hardly express any word,
Right so I do, and therefore I pray to you,
Guide my song that I shall say of you.
There was in Asia, in a great city,
Among Christian folk a Ghetto,
Sustained by a lord of that country
For foul usury and shameful profits,
Hateful to Christ and to his company;
And through the street men might ride or go,
For it was free and open at either end.
A little school of Christian folk there stood
Down at the farther end, in which there were
A good many children, descended from Christian blood,
That learned in that school year by year
Such sort of doctrine as men used there,
This is to say, to sing and to read,
As small children do in their childhood.
Among these children was a widow's son,
A little schoolboy, seven years of age,
Whose custom was day by day to go to school,
And in addition, moreover, where he saw the image
Of Christ's mother, he had the practice,
As was taught to him, to kneel down and say
His `Hail Mary,' as he goes by the way.
Thus this widow has taught her little son 
Our blissful Lady, Christ's dear mother,
To worship always, and he forgot it not,
For an innocent child will always quickly learn.
But always, when I think about this matter,
Saint Nicholas stands ever in my mind,
Because he so young did reverence to Christ.
This little child, learning his little book,
As he sat in the school at his primer,
He heard `Gracious (mother) of the Redeemer' being sung,
As children learned their antiphonal hymns;
And as he dared, he drew him nearer and nearer,
And listened always to the words and the notes,
Until he knew the first verse entirely by heart.
He knew not what this Latin meant,
For he was so young and tender of age.
But on one day he did pray his fellow
To explain to him this song in his language,
Or tell him why this song was in regular use;
This he prayed him to translate and explain
Very frequently upon his bare knees.
His fellow, who was older than he,
Answered him thus: "This song, I have heard tell,
Was composed about our generous blissful Lady,
To salute her, and also to pray her 
To be our help and succour when we die.
I can explain no more of this matter.
I learn song; I know but little grammar."
"And is this song composed in reverence
Of Christ's mother?" said this innocent.
"Now, certainly, I will do my best efforts
To learn it all before Christmas is gone.
Though I for my primer shall be punished
And shall be beaten thrice in an hour,
I will learn it to honor Our Lady!"
His fellow privately taught him (as they went) homeward,
From day to day, until he knew it by heart,
And then he sang it well and boldly,
From word to word, in harmony with the tune.
Twice a day it passed through his throat,
When he went toward school and homeward;
On Christ's mother his mind was set.
As I have said, throughout the Ghetto
This little child, as he came to and fro,
Very merrily then would he sing and cry
Always `O Gracious (mother) of the Redeemer'
So pierced his heart the sweetness 
Of Christ's mother that, to pray to her,
He can not stop singing by the way.
Our first foe, the serpent Satan,
That has his wasp's nest in Jews' hearts,
Swelled up, and said, "Oh Hebraic people, alas!
Is this a thing that is honorable to you,
That such a boy shall walk as he pleases
In scorn of you, and sing of such a subject,
Which is against your law's (due) reverence?"
From thenceforth the Jews have conspired
To drive this innocent out of this world.
For this they have hired a murderer, 
Who in an alley had a secret place;
And as the child began to pass by,
This cursed Jew seized him, and held him tightly,
And cut his throat, and cast him in a pit.
I say that they threw him in a privy 
Where these Jews purge their entrails.
Oh cursed folk of new Herods, 
What may your evil intent avail you?
Murder will come out, certainly, it will not fail,
And especially where the honor of God shall spread;
The blood cries out on your cursed deed.
Oh martyr, firmly united to virginity,
Now canst thou sing, following continuously
The white celestial Lamb -- said she --
Of which the great evangelist, Saint John,
In Pathmos wrote, who says that they that go
Before this Lamb and sing a song all new,
(Are) those who never, in a carnal way, knew women.
This poor widow waits all that night
For her little child, but he came not;
For which, as soon as it was daylight,
With face pale from dread and intense thought,
She has sought him at school and elsewhere,
Until finally she got so far as to discover
That he was last seen in the Ghetto.
With mother's pity enclosed in her breast,
She goes, as if she were half out of her mind,
To every place where she has supposed
Most likely to find her little child;
And ever on Christ's meek and kind mother
She cried, and at the last thus she acted:
Among the cursed Jews she sought him.
She asks and she prays piteously
To every Jew that dwelt in that same place,
To tell her if her child at all went by there.
They said "nay"; but Jesus of his grace
Gave it in her thought within a short while
So that she cried for her son in that place,
Where he was cast in a pit near by.
Oh great God, who performest thy praise
By mouths of innocents, lo, here is thy power!
This gem of chastity, this emerald,
And also the bright ruby of martyrdom,
Where he with throat carved lay on his back,
He `Gracious (mother) of the Redeemer' began to sing
So loud that all the place began to ring.
The Christian folk who went through the street
Came in to wonder upon this thing,
And hastily they sent for the magistrate;
He came quickly without tarrying,
And praises Christ who is king of heaven,
And also his mother, honor of mankind,
And after that he had the Jews bound.
This child with piteous lamentation
Was taken up, singing his song always,
And with the honor of a great procession
They carry him unto the nearby abbey.
His mother swooning lay by his bier;
The people that were there could hardly 
Bring this new Rachel from his bier.
With torment and with shameful death for each one,
This magistrate had these Jews put to death  
Who knew of this murder, and that immediately.
He would not tolerate any such cursedness.
"Evil shall have what evil will deserve";
Therefore with wild horses he had them torn apart,
And after that he hanged them by the law.
Upon this bier always lies this innocent
Before the chief altar, while the masse lasted;
And after that, the abbot with his convent
Have hurried to bury him very quickly;
And when they cast holy water on him,
Yet spoke this child, when holy water was sprinkled,
And sang `O Gracious (mother) of the Redeemer!'
This abbot, who was a holy man,
As monks are -- or else ought to be --
He began to entreat this young child,
And said, "Oh dear child, I beseech thee,
By power of the holy Trinity,
Tell me what is thy cause to sing,
Since thy throat is cut as it seems to me?"
"My throat is cut unto my neck boon,"
Said this child, "and in the natural course of events
I should have dyed, yea, a long time ago.
But Jesus Christ, as you find in books,
Desires that his glory should last and be in mind,
And for the worship of his Mother dear
Yet can I sing `O Gracious (mother)' loud and clear.
"This well of mercy, Christ's sweet mother,
I loved always, according to my ability,
And when I had to lose my life,
She came to me, and told me to sing
This anthem truly as I was dying,
As you have heard, and when I had sung,
It seemed to me that she laid a grain upon my tongue.
"Therefore I sing, and must sing certainly,
In honor of that blissful generous Maiden
Until the grain is taken off my tongue;
And after that thus she said to me:
`My little child, at that time I will fetch thee,
When the grain is taken from thy tongue.
Be not afraid; I will not forsake thee.'"
This holy monk, this abbot, I mean him,
His tongue pulled out, and took away the grain,
And he gave up the ghost very gently.
And when this abbot had seen this wonder,
His salt tears trickled down like rain,
And face-down he fell all flat upon the ground,
And still he lay as if he had been bound.
The convent also lay on the pavement
Weeping, and praising Christ's dear mother,
And after that they rise, and forth are gone,
And took away this martyr from his bier;
And in a tomb of clear marble stones 
They enclose his sweet little body.
There he is now, God grant us to meet!
Oh young Hugh of Lincoln, slain also
By cursed Jews, as it is well known,
For it is but a little while ago,
Pray also for us, we sinful folk unstable,
That of his mercy God so merciful
Multiply his great mercy on us,
For reverence of his mother Mary. Amen
</b>
