When folk had laughed at this foolish business
Of Absolon and clever Nicholas,
Different folk said different opinions,
But for the most part they laughed and enjoyed themselves.
And at this tale I saw no man aggrieved,
Except for only Osewold the Reeve.
Because he was of the carpenter's craft,
A little anger is left in his heart;
He began to grouch, and criticized it a little.
"As I may prosper," said he, "very well could I repay thee
With (a tale of the) blearing of a proud miller's eye (tricking him),
If I wanted to speak of ribaldry.
But I am old; because of age I do not want to play;
Grass time is done; my fodder is now dry straw;
This white head reveals my old years;
My heart is as moldy as my hairs,
Unless I fare as does the fruit of the medlar --
That same fruit continually grows worse,
Until it is rotten in rubbish or in straw.
We old men, I fear, fare like that:
Until we are rotten, we can not be ripe;
We dance always while the world will pipe.
For in our will there sticks ever a nail,
To have a white head and a green tail,
As a leek has; for though our power is gone,
Our will desires folly continually.
For when we can not do anything, then will we talk about it;
Yet in our old ashes fire is raked over (covered).
"Four live coals have we, which I shall describe --
Boasting, lying, anger, greed;
These four little sparks belong to old age.
Our old limbs may well be feeble,
But desire shall not be lacking, that is truth.
And yet I have always a young man's desires,
As many years as have passed hence
Since my tap of life began to run.
For surely, when I was born, immediately
Death turned on the spigot of life and let it flow,
And ever since the tap has so run
Until the barrel is almost all empty.
The stream of life now drops on the rim.
The foolish tongue may well ring and chime
About wretchedness that passed long ago;
With old folk, save dotage, there is no more!"
When our Host had heard this sermon making,
He began to speak as lordly as a king.
He said, "What amounts all this wit?
What! shall we speak all day of holy writ?
The devil made a reeve to preach,
Or of a cobbler made a shipman or a physician.
Say forth thy tale, and do not waste the time.
Lo Deptford, and it is almost seven thirty!
Lo Greenwich, in which is many a rascal!
It is well time to begin thy tale."
"Now, sires," said this Osewold the Reeve,
"I pray yow all that you not be displeased,
Though I answer (him), and somewhat make a fool of him; 
For it is permissable to repel force with force.
"This drunk Miller has told us here
How a carpenter was tricked,
Perhaps in scorn, for I am one.
And, by your leave, I shall repay him right now;
Right in his churl's terms will I speak.
I pray to God his neck may break into pieces;
He can well in my eye see a piece of straw,
But in his own he can not see a large piece of timber."
At Trumpington, not far from Cambridge,
There goes a brook, and over that a bridge,
Upon the which brook there stands a mill;
And this is absolute truth that I tell you:
A miller was there dwelling many a day.
As any peacock he was proud and gay.
He could play the bagpipe and fish, and mend nets,
And play a drinking game, and well wrestle and shoot;
Always by his belt he carried a long cutlass,
And very sharp was the blade of the sword.
An elegant dagger he carried in his pouch;
There was no man, for peril, dared touch him.
A Sheffield knife he carried in his hose.
Round was his face, and he had a pug nose;
As bald as an ape was his skull.
He was a quarrelsome bully in every way.
There dared no person lay hand upon him,
That he did not swear he should pay for it right away.
A thief he was, in truth, of grain and meal,
And that a sly one, and accustomed to steal.
His name was called haughty Symkyn.
A wife he had, come of noble kin;
The parson of the town was her father.
With her he gave very many a pan of brass,
So that Symkyn should be allied with his family.
She was fostered in a nunnery;
For Symkyn would have no wife, as he said,
Unless she were well educated and a virgin,
To preserve his state of yeomanry.
And she was proud, and brazen as is a magpie.
A very fair sight was it to look upon those two;
On holidays before her would he go
With the tip of his hood wound about his head,
And she came after in a gown of red;
And Symkyn had hose of the same color.
There dared no one call her anything but "lady";
There was no one so brave that went by the way
That dared flirt with her or once play,
Unless he wished to be slain by Symkyn
With cutlass, or with knife, or dagger.
For jealous folk are dangerous always --
At least they would like their wives to think so.
And also, because she was a bit besmirched (by her illegitimacy),
She was as haughty as water in a ditch,
And full of disdain and of scorn.
She thought that a lady should be aloof,
Considering her family and her education
Which she had learned in the nunnery.
A daughter had they between them two
Of twenty years of age, without any more,
Except for a child that was a half year of age;
In cradle it lay and was a good looking little boy.
This wench was thick and well grown,
With pug nose and eyes gray as glass,
With buttocks broad and breasts round and high.
But right fair was her hair; I will not lie.
This parson of the town, because she was fair,
Was determined to make her his heir,
Both of his property and his household,
And he raised difficulties about her marriage.
His purpose was to bestow her high
Into some worthy family of noble ancestry;
For holy church's goods must be dispensed
To holy church's blood, which is descended from the church.
Therefore he would his holy blood honor,
Though he holy church should devour.
A profitable monopoly on milling has this miller, out of doubt,
With wheat and malt of all the land about;
And namely there was an important college
People call the Soler Hall at Cambridge;
There their wheat and also their malt was ground.
And on one day it happened, at a time,
The manciple lay sick with a malady;
People thought indeed that he should die.
For which this miller stole both meal and grain
A hundred times more than before;
For before this he stole but courteously,
But now he was a thief excessively,
For which the warden (of the college) complained and made a fuss.
But the miller thought that not worth a weed;
He blustered fiercely, and swore it was not so.
Then were there two young poor scholars,
Who dwelt in this hall, of which I tell.
Headstrong they were, and eager for sport,
And, only for their mirth and amusement,
Upon the warden busily they implore
To give them leave, for but a little while,
To go to the mill and see their grain ground;
And boldly they dared pledge their necks
The miller should not steal from them half a peck
Of grain by trickery, nor rob them by force;
And at the last the warden gave hem leave.
John was called that one, and Aleyn was called that other;
Of one town were they born, that was called Strother,
Far in the north; I can not tell where.
This Aleyn makes ready all his gear,
And on a horse the sack he cast immediately.
Forth goes Aleyn the clerk, and also John,
With good sword and with buckler by their sides.
John knew the way -- they needed no guide --
And at the mill he lays the sack down.
Aleyn spoke first: "All hail, Symond, in faith!
How fares thy faire daughter and thy wife?"
"Aleyn, welcome," said Symkyn, "by my life!
And John also, how now, what do you here?"
"Symond," said John, "by God, need knows no law.
He who has no servant must serve himself,
Or else he is a fool, as clerks say.
Our manciple, I expect he will be dead,
So continually ache the teeth in his head;
And therefore I am come, and also Alayn,
To grind our grain and carry it home again;
I pray you speed us hence as fast as you can."
"It shall be done," said Symkyn, "by my faith!
What will you do while it is being done?"
"By God, right by the hopper will I stand,"
Said John, "and see how the grain goes in.
Yet saw I never, by my father's kin,
How the hopper wags to and fro."
Aleyn answered, "John, and wilt thou do so?
Then will I be beneath, by my head,
And see how the meal falls down
Into the trough; that shall be my sport.
For John, in faith, I may be like you;
I am as poor a miller as you are."
This miller smiled at their foolishness,
And thought, "All this is done only for a trick.
They think that no man can trick them,
But by my welfare, yet shall I blear their eyes (fool them),
Despite all the trickery in their philosophy.
The more ingenious tricks that they make,
The more will I steal when I take.
Instead of flour yet will I give them bran.
`The greatest clerks are not the wisest men,'
As once to the wolf thus spoke the mare.
All their learning I reckon not worth a weed."
Out at the door he goes full stealthily,
When he saw his time, quietly.
He looks up and down until he has found
The clerks' horse, where it stood tied
Behind the mill, under an arbor;
And to the horse he goes gently; 
He strips off the bridle right away.
And when the horse was loose, he begins to go
Toward the fen, where wild mares run,
And forth with "wehee," through thick and through thin.
This miller goes back to the mill, no word he said,
But does his work, and with the clerks amused himself
Until their grain was completely ground.
And when the meal is sacked and tied,
This John goes out and finds his horse gone away,
And began to cry "Help!" and "Wellaway!
Our horse is lost, Alayn, for God's bones,
Step on thy feet! Come on, man, quickly!
Alas, our warden has lost his saddle horse."
This Aleyn forgot everything, both meal and grain;
All his skillful management was out of his mind.
"What, which way is he gone?" he began to cry.
The wife cam leaping inward at a run.
She said, "Alas! your horse goes to the fen
With wild mares, as fast as he can go.
Curses come on his hand that tied him so carelessly,
And he that should have tied the rein better!"
"Alas," said John, "Aleyn, for Christ's pain
Lay down thy sword, and I will mine also.
I am full strong (swift), God knows, as is a roe deer;
By God's heart, he shall not escape us both!
Why did thou not put the horse in the barn?
Bad luck! By God, Alayn, thou art a fool!"
These hapless clerks have run very fast 
Toward the fen, both Aleyn and also John.
And when the miller saw that they were gone,
He half a bushel of their flour has taken,
And ordered his wife to go knead it in a cake.
He said, "I suppose the clerks were leery (of what I might do).
Yet can a miller make a clerk's beard (trick a clerk),
Despite all his learning; now let them go their way!
Lo, there he goes! Yes, let the children play.
They will not catch him easily, by my crown."
These hapless clerks run up and down
With "Stop! Stop! Stand! Stand! Down there, watch out behind,
Go whistle thou, and I shall catch him here!"
But shortly, until that it was truly night,
They could not, though they did al their might,
Catch their horse, he ran always so fast,
Until in a ditch they caught him at the last.
Weary and wet, as a beast is in the rain,
Comes hapless John, and with him comes Aleyn.
"Alas," said John, "the day that I was born!
Now are we driven to contempt and to scorn.
Our grain is stolen; men will call us fools,
Both the warden and all our fellows,
And namely the miller, wellaway!"
Thus laments John as he goes by the way
Toward the mill, and the horse Bayard in his hand.
The miller sitting by the fire he found,
For it was night, and further they could not go;
But for the love of God they ask him  
For lodging and for refreshment, for their cash.
The miller said in reply, "If there be any,
Such as it is, yet shall you have your share.
My house is small, but you have learned the art of logic;
You know how by logical arguments to make a place
A mile broad out of twenty feet of space.
Let's see now if this place may suffice,
Or make it large by speech, as is your custom."
"Now, Symond," said John, "by Saint Cuthbert,
Thou art always joking, and this is nicely answered.
I have heard said, `Man shall take one of two things:
Such as he finds, or take such as he brings.'
But specially I pray thee, host dear,
Get us some food and drink, and make us good cheer,
And we will pay truly at the full.
With empty hand men may lure no hawks;
Lo, here is our silver, ready to spend."
This miller into town his daughter sent
For ale and bread, and roasted them a goose,
And tied up their horse, it should no more go loose,
And in his own bedroom made them a bed,
With sheets and with blankets nicely spread
Not ten feet or twelve from his own bed.
His daughter had a bed, all by herself,
Right in the same chamber side by side.
It could be no better, and (do you know) the cause why?
There was no larger lodging in the place.
They sup and they converse, to entertain themselves,
And drink ever strong ale of the best quality.
About midnight they went to bed.
Well has this miller varnished his head (drank heavily);
Full pale he was for drunkenness, and not red.
He belches, and he speaks through the nose
As if he had hoarseness, or had a cold.
To bed he goes, and with him goes his wife.
She was as cheerful and jolly as any jay,
So was her jolly whistle well wetted.
The cradle at her bed's feet is set,
To rock, and to give the child to suck.
And when all that was in the crock was drunk,
To bed went the daughter right away;
To bed goes Aleyn and also John;
There was no more -- they needed no sleeping potion.
This miller has imbibed so much ale
That he snorts like a horse in his sleep,
And of his tail behind he took no heed.
His wife bore him a bass accompaniment, very loud;
One could hear their snoring two furlongs away;
The wench snores also, to keep them company.
Aleyn the clerk, who heard this melody,
He poked John, and said, "Sleepest thou?
Heardest thou ever such a song before now?
Lo, such a compline (evening service) is made by them all;
May a wild fire upon their bodies fall!
Who heard ever such an amazing thing?
Yes, they shall have the best (i.e., the worst) of a bad ending.
This long night there comes to me no sleep;
But yet, no matter, all shall be for the best.
For, John," said he, "as ever I may thrive,
If I can, yon wench will I screw.
Some redress the law has shaped for us,
For, John, there is a law that says thus:
That if a man in one point is injured,
That in another he shall be relieved.
Our grain is stolen, truly, it can not be denied,
And we have had a hard time all this day;
And since I shall have no recompense
For my loss, I will have satisfaction.
By God's soul, it shall be no other way!"
This John answered, "Alayn, be careful!
The miller is a perilous man," he said,
"And if he out of his sleep suddenly awoke,
He might do injury to us both."
Aleyn answered, "I reckon him not worth a fly."
And up he rises, and by the wench he crept.
This wench lay on her back and fast slept,
Until he was so near, before she could see him,
It was too late to cry out,
And shortly to speak, they were together. 
Now play, Aleyn, for I will speak of John.
This John lies still five minutes or so,
And to himself he laments and feels sorry.
"Alas!" said he, "this is a wicked trick;
Now may I say that I am nothing but a fool.
Yet has my fellow something for his harm;
He has the miller's daughter in his arm.
He took a risk, and has accomplished his purpose,
And I lie like a sack of rubbish in my bed;
And when this trick is told another day,
I shall be considered a fool, a weakling!
I will arise and chance it, by my faith!
`The timid one is unlucky,' thus people say."
And up he rose, and quietly he went
To the cradle, and in his hand seized it,
And carried it quietly to the foot of his bed.
Soon after this the wife stopped her snoring,
And awoke, and went out to piss,
And came back, and began to miss her cradle,
And groped here and there, but she found none.
"Alas!" said she, "I had almost gone wrong;
I had almost gone to the clerks' bed.
Ay, bless me! Then I would have made a mess of it!"
And forth she goes until she found the cradle.
She gropes always further with her hand,
And found the bed, and thought all was well,
Because the cradle by it stood,
And did not know where she was, for it was dark;
But gently she crept in to the clerk,
And lies full still, and would have gone to sleep.
Within a moment this John the clerk leaped up,
And on this good wife he lays on vigorously.
She had not had so merry an experience for a long time;
He stabs hard and deep as if he were mad.
This jolly life have these two clerks led
Until the third cock began to sing (an hour before dawn).
Aleyn grew weary at the time of dawn,
For he had labored all the long night,
And said, "Farewell, Malyne, sweet creature!
The day is come; I may no longer remain here;
But evermore, wherever I walk or ride,
I am thine own clerk, as I may prosper!"
"Now, dear sweetheart," said she, "go, farewell!
But before thou go, one thing I will tell thee:
When thou go homeward by the mill,
Right at the entry behind the door 
Thou shalt find a cake of half a bushel
That was made of thine own meal,
Which I helped my father to steal.
And, good sweetheart, God save and keep thee!"
And with that word she almost began to weep.
Aleyn up rises, and thought, "Before it dawns,
I will go creep in by my fellow,"
And found the cradle with his hand right away.
"By God," thought he, "I have gone all wrong.
My head is dizzy from my work to-night,
That makes me go not right.
I know well by the cradle I have gone wrong;
Here lies the miller and his wife also."
And forth he goes, in the name of twenty devils,
Unto the bed where the miller lay.
He expected to have crept in by his fellow John,
And in by the miller he crept right then,
And caught him by the neck, and quietly he spoke.
He said, "Thou John, thou pig's-head, awake,
For Christ's soul, and hear a real joke.
For by that lord that is called Saint James,
I have three times in this short night
Screwed the miller's daughter flat on her back,
While thou hast, like a coward, been terrified."
"Yes, false scoundrel," said the miller, "hast (thou done so)?
Ah, false traitor! False clerk!" said he,
"Thou shalt be dead, by God's worthiness!
Who dared be so bold to degrade
My daughter, who is come from such noble lineage?"
And by the Adam's apple he caught Alayn,
And he seized him angrily in turn,
And on the nose he smote him with his fist.
Down ran the bloody stream upon his breast;
And on the floor, with nose and mouth badly broken,
They wallow as do two pigs in a bag;
And up they go, and down again straightway,
Until the miller stumbled on a stone,
And down he fell backward upon his wife,
Who knew nothing of this foolish strife;
For she was fallen asleep a little bit
With John the clerk, who had been awake all night,
And with the fall out of her sleep she started up.
"Help! holy cross of Bromeholm," she said,
"In your hands! Lord, to Thee I call!
Awake, Symond! The fiend has fallen on me.
My heart is broken; help! I am as good as dead!
There lies one upon my belly and one on my head.
Help, Symkyn, for the false clerks fight!"
This John started up as fast as ever he could,
And grasps by the walls to and fro,
To find a staff; and she leaped up also,
And knew the interior of the house better than did this John,
And by the wall a staff she found right away,
And saw a little glimmering of a light,
For at a hole in shone the moon bright,
And by that light she saw both the two of them,
But surely she did not know who was who,
But she saw a white thing in her eye.
And when she did espy this white thing,
She thought the clerk had worn a night cap,
And with the staff she drew ever nearer and nearer,
And intended to have hit this Aleyn squarely,
And smote the miller on the bald skull,
So that down he goes, and cried, "Help! I die!"
These clerks beat him well and let him lie,
And dress themselves, and took their horse straightway,
And also their meal, and on their way they go.
And at the mill yet they took their cake
Of half a bushel flour, very well baked.
Thus is the proud miller well beaten,
And has lost the charge for grinding of the wheat,
And paid for the supper every bit
Of Aleyn and of John, who beat him well.
His wife is screwed, and his daughter also.
Lo, this is how it is when a miller is false!
And therefore this proverb is said very truly,
"One who does evil should not expect good."
A trickster shall himself be tricked.
And God, that sits high in majesty,
Save al this company, high ranking and low (every one)!
Thus have I repaid the Miller in my tale.
ALIGN=top></A></LEFT> Texts on this page prepared and maintained by L. D. Benson <A HREF="mailto:ldb@wjh.harvard.edu">(ldb@wjh.harvard.edu)</A> 
