A merchant once dwelled at Seint-Denis, 
Who was rich, for which men considered him wise.
He had a wife of excellent beauty;
And she was sociable and fond of revelry, 
Which is a thing that causes more expense
Than is worth all the good cheer and reverence 
That men do to them at festivities and at dances. 
Such salutations and courtesies
Pass away as does a shadow upon the wall;
But woe to him that must pay for all!
The poor (hapless) husband, always he must pay, 
He must clothe us, and he must adorn us
Richly, all for the sake of his own reputation,
In which finery we dance merrily.
And if it happens he can not pay, 
Or else desires to endure no such expense,
But thinks it is wasted and lost,
Then another must pay for our costs,
Or lend us gold, and that is perilous.
This noble merchant held a worthy house,
For which he always had so many guests
Because of his generosity, and because his wife was fair, 
That it is a wonder; but listen to my tale.
Among all his guests, high ranking and low,
There was a monk, a handsome man and a bold one --
I believe he was about thirty years old --
Who continually was drawing to that place.
This young monk, who had so handsome a face,
Was so acquainted with the good man,
Since their first acquaintance began,
That in his house as intimate was he 
As it is possible for any friend to be.
And in view of the fact that this good man,
And also this monk of whom I began (to tell),
The two of them, were both born in one village, 
The monk claims him as a kinsman,
And he does the same; he not once says 'nay,'
But was as glad of this as a fowl is of day,
For to his heart it was a great pleasure.
Thus are they knit with eternal alliance,
And each of them assured the other 
Of brotherhood while their life may endure.
Free-handed was Don John, and generous in spending
In that house, and full of diligence
To do pleasure, and also great expenditure. 
He did not forget to give to the lowest ranking servant
In all that house; but according to their rank, 
He gave to the lord, and then to all his household, 
When he came, some sort of suitable gift,
For which they were as glad of his coming
As a fowl is happy when the sun rises up.
No more of this for now, for it suffices.
But as it happened, this merchant on a day
Decided to make ready his preparations
To travel to the town of Bruges ,
To buy there a quantity of merchandise;
For which he has to Paris sent immediately
A messenger, and has prayed Don John
That he should come to Seint-Denis to visit
With him and with his wife a day or two,
Before he went to Bruges, indeed.
This noble monk, of whom I tell you,
Has of his abbot, as he pleases, permission, 
Because he was a man of great prudence
And also an officer, to ride out
To see to their granges and their capacious barns,
And he comes quickly to Seint-Denis.
Who was so welcome as my lord Don John,
Our dear cousin, full of courtesy?
With him he brought a jug of malmsey wine, 
And also another full of fine white wine,
And game fowls, as always was his custom.
And thus I let them eat and drink and amuse themselves,
This merchant and this monk, for a day or two.
The third day, this merchant up arises,
And seriously considers his business,
And he goes up into his counting-house
To reckon with himself, as it well may be,
Of that same year how it stood with him,
And how he had spent his funds,
And if he had profited or not.
His account books and his moneybags many a one
He lays before him on his counting-board.
His treasure and his hoard was very rich,
For which he very tightly shut his counting house-door;
And also he wanted that no one should hinder him
From (making) his accounts, for the time being;
And thus he sits until it was past nine o'clock.
Don John had also risen in the morning,
And in the garden walks to and fro,
And has said his prayers very courteously.
This good wife came walking alone 
Into the garden, where he walks quietly,
And salutes him, as she has often done.
A maid servant came in her company,
Whom she may govern and guide as she pleases,
For the maid was yet subject to adult discipline.
"Oh my dear cousin, Don John," she said,
"What ails you to rise so early?"
"Niece," said he, "it ought enough suffice
To sleep five hours upon a night,
Unless it were for an old enfeebled creature, 
As are these wedded men, that lie and doze
As in his lair sits a weary hare,
Which is greatly distressed by hounds great and small.
But dear niece, why are you so pale?
I believe, certainly, that the head of our household
Has labored you since the night began
So much that you badly have need to rest."
And with that word he laughed very merrily,
And of his own thought he grew all red.
This fair wife began to shake her head
And said thus, "Yea, God knows all," she said.
"Nay, my cousin, it stands not so with me;
For, by that God that gave me soul and life,
In all the realm of France there is no wife
That has less desire for that sorry play.
For I may sing `alas and alack
That I was born,' but to no one," she said,
"Dare I tell how it stands with me.
Therefore I intend to go out of this land,
Or else to make an end of myself,
I am so full of dread and also of care."
This monk began to stare upon this wife,
And said, "Alas, my niece, God forbid
That you, for any sorrow or any dread,
Should destroy yourself; but tell me your grief.
Perhaps I can, in your unhappy situation,
Advise or help; and therefore tell me
All your trouble, for it shall be secret.
For on my prayer book I make an oath
That never in my life, willing or unwilling,
Shall I betray any of your secrets."
"The same in reply to you," she said, "I say.
By God and by this prayer book I swear,
Though men would tear me all to pieces
I shall never, even though I go to hell for it,
Betray a word of anything that you tell me,
Not for any kinship nor alliance,
But truly for love and trust."
Thus they are sworn, and thereupon they kissed,
And each of them told the other what they pleased.
"Cousin," she said, "if I had a space of time,
As I have none, and especially in this place,
Then would I tell a legend of my life,
What I have suffered since I was a wife
Because of my husband, although he is your cousin."
"Nay," said this monk, "by God and Saint Martin,
He is no more cousin unto me
Than is this leaf that hangs on the tree!
I call him so, by Saint Denis of France,
To have the more opportunity of acquaintance
With you, whom I have loved especially
Above all women, certainly.
This I swear to you on my religious vows.
Tell your grief, lest that he come down;
And hasten you, and go your way quickly."
ALIGN=top></A></LEFT> Texts on this page prepared and maintained by L. D. Benson <A HREF="mailto:ldb@wjh.harvard.edu">(ldb@wjh.harvard.edu)</A> 
