"My dear love," she said, "Oh my Don John,
I wish I could hide this secret,
But it must come out; I can delay no longer,
My husband is to me the worst man
That ever was since the world began.
But since I am a wife, it does not suit me
To tell any one of our private matters,
Neither in bed nor in any other place;
God forbid I should tell it, for His grace!
A wife should say nothing of her husband
Except what is to his honor, so far as I can understand;
Except unto you this much I shall tell:
So help me God, he is not worth at all
In any way the value of a fly.
But yet his miserliness grieves me most.
And well you know that women naturally
Desire six things as well as I:
They would that their husbands should be
Vigorous and wise, and rich, and moreover generous,
And obedient unto his wife and vigorous in bed.
But by that same Lord that for us bled,
To clothe myself in a manner that does honor to my husband,
On next Sunday I must of necessity pay
A hundred franks, or else I am lost.
Yet I would rather that I were never born
Than a disgrace or dishonor were done to me;
And also if my husband might discover it,
I would be as good as lost; and therefore I pray you,
Lend me this sum, or else I must die.
Don John, I say, lend me these hundred franks.
By God, I will not fail to give you my thanks,
If it pleases you to do what I pray of you.
For at a certain day I will pay you,
And do to you whatever pleasure and service
That I can do, exactly as you please to command.
And unless I do so, God take on me vengeance
As foul as ever had Ganelon of France."
This gentle monk answered in this manner:
"Now truly, my own dear lady,
I have," he said, "on you such great pity
That I swear to you, and pledge you my word,
That when your husband is gone to Flanders,
I will deliver you out of this care;
For I will bring you a hundred franks."
And with that word he caught her by the flanks,
And embraces her hard, and kissed her often.
"Go now your way," he said, "all still and quietly,
And let us dine as soon as you can;
For by my sundial it is almost noon.
Go now, and be as true as I shall be."
"Now God forbid (anything) else, sir," she said;
And forth she goes as jolly as a magpie,
And ordered the cooks that they should hasten,
So that people could dine, and that quickly.
Up to her husband this wife is gone,
And boldly knocks at his counting-house door.
"Who is there?" he said. "By Saint Peter! it's me,"
Said she; "What, sir! how long will you fast?
How long a time will you reckon and calculate
Your sums, and your books, and your business matters?
The devil take all such reckonings!
You have enough, by God, of God's gifts;
Come down to-day, and let your moneybags be.
Are you not ashamed that Don John
Must go fasting all this day long?
What! let us hear a mass and go dine."
"Wife," this man said, "little canst thou guess
The worrisome preoccupations that we have.
For of us merchants, as God may save me,
And by that lord that is called Saint Yve,
Scarcely amongst twelve shall two thrive
Continually, surviving unto our age.
We may well seem cheerful and put on a good face,
And endure the world as it may be,
And keep our condition private, 
Until we are dead, or else we go on
A pilgrimage, or go out of the way (in hiding).
And therefore I have great need
To plan carefully upon this tricky world,
For always we must stand in fear
Of chance and fortune in our business dealings.
"I will go to Flanders tomorrow at daylight,
And come back again, as soon as ever I can.
For which, my dear wife, I beseech thee,
Be to every creature humble and meek,
And be diligent to guard our possessions,
And properly govern our house well.
Thou hast enough, in every sort of way,
That may suffice to a prosperous household.
You lack no supplies nor victuals;
Thou shalt not lack silver in thy purse ."
And with that word he shut his counting house-door,
And down he goes, no longer would he delay.
But hastily a mass was there said,
And speedily the tables were laid,
And quickly they sped to the dinner,
And richly the merchant fed this monk.
At after-dinner Don John soberly
Took aside this merchant, and privately
He said to him thus: "Cousin, it stands so,
That I see well to Bruges you will go.
God and Saint Augustine speed and guide you!
I pray you, cousin, that you ride carefully.
Govern yourself also in your diet
Moderately, and especially in this heat.
Between us two there need be no elaborate courtesies;
Farewell, cousin; God protect you from trouble!
And if there be any thing by day or night,
If it lie in my power and my might,
That you will ask of me in any way,
It shall be done exactly as you will specify.
"One thing, before you go, if it may be,
I would pray of you: to lend me
A hundred franks, for a week or two,
For a certain number of beasts that I must buy,
With which to stock a place that is ours.
So help me God, I would it were yours!
I surely shall not fail to repay you on the day it is due,
Not for a thousand franks, by so much as twenty minutes.
But let this thing be secret, I pray you,
For yet to-night I must buy these beasts.
And now fare well, my own dear cousin;
Many thanks for your expenditures and for your hospitality."
This noble merchant courteously straightway
Answered and said, "Oh my cousin, Don John,
Now surely this is a small request.
My gold is yours, whenever it pleases you,
And not only my gold, but my merchandise.
Take what you please; God forbid that you stint.
"But there is one thing, you know it well enough
About merchants, that their money is their plough.
We may borrow while we have a good name,
But to be without gold, it is no joke.
Pay it back when it is convenient for you;
According to my power, I would be very glad to please you."
These hundred franks he fetched forth quickly,
And privately he gave them to Don John.
No creature in all this world knew of this loan
Except for this merchant and Don John alone.
They drink, and speak, and stroll about a while and amuse themselves,
Until Don John rides to his abbey.
The morning came, and forth this merchant rides
To Flanders; his apprentice guides him well
Until he came merrily into Bruges.
Now goes this merchant quickly and busily
About his business, and buys and obtains credit.
He neither plays at the dice nor dances,
But as a merchant (should), shortly to tell,
He led his life, and there I let him dwell.
