The Sunday next after the merchant was gone,
To Seint-Denis is come Don John,
With the top of his head and beard all fresh and newly shaved.
In all the house there was not so humble a servant boy,
Nor any one else, who was not very glad
That my lord Don John was come again.
And shortly, to go directly to the point,
This fair wife agreed with Don John
That for these hundred franks he should all night
Have her in his arms flat on her back;
And this agreement was performed in deed.
In mirth all night they lead a busy life
Until it was day, and Don John went his way,
And bade the household "Farewell, have good day!"
For none of them, nor any one in the town,
Has of Don John any suspicion at all.
And forth he rides home to his abbey,
Or where he pleases; I say no more of him.
This merchant, when the fair was ended,
Did return to Seint-Denis,
And with his wife he makes merriment and good cheer,
And tells her that merchandise is so expensive
That of necessity he had to make an arrangement for credit
For he was bound in a formal pledge
To pay twenty thousand shields quickly.
For which this merchant is gone to Paris
To borrow from certain friends that he had
A certain number of franks; and some with him he brought.
And when he had come into the town,
For great fondness and great affection,
He first goes unto Don John to visit him;
Not to ask or borrow money from him,
But in order to know and see about his welfare,
And to tell him of his business,
As friends do when they are met together.
Don John makes him festive and merry hospitality,
And he told him in turn, in great detail,
How he had bought well and successfully,
Thanked be God, all of his merchandise,
Except that he must, no matter what, 
Arrange for a loan, as for his best (course of action),
And then he would be in joy and rest.
Don John answered, "Certainly, I am glad
That you are come home again in good health.
And if I were rich, as I may have bliss,
You should not lack twenty thousand shields ,
For you so kindly this other day
Lent me gold; and as I know how and can,
I thank you, by God and by Saint James!
But nonetheless, I gave unto our dame,
Your wife, at home, the same gold in return
Upon your counting board; she knows it well, certainly,
By certain proofs that I can tell her.
Now, by your leave, I can no longer dwell;
Our abbot will go out of this town very soon,
And I must go in his company.
Greet well our dame, my own sweet niece,
And farewell, dear cousin, until we meet!"
This merchant, who was very prudent and wise,
Has obtained credit, and paid also in Paris
To certain Lombard bankers, ready in their hand (in cash),
The sum of gold, and redeemed his bond from them;
And home he goes, merry as a parrot,
For well he knew he stood in such condition
That by necessity he must earn in that journey
A thousand franks above all his costs.
His wife very readily met him at the gate,
As was her long established custom at all times,
And all that night they devoted themselves to mirth.
For he was rich and clearly out of debt.
When it was day, this merchant did embrace
His wife anew, and kissed her on her face,
And up he goes and makes it full tough.
"No more," said she, "by God, you have enough!"
And wantonly again she played with him
Until at the last thus this merchant said:
"By God," said he, "I am a little angry
With you, my wife, although I am reluctant to be so.
And do you know why? By God, because I guess
That you have made a sort of estrangement
Between me and my cousin Don John.
You should have warned me, before I had gone,
That he had paid a hundred franks to you
In cash; and considered himself ill used,
Because I spoke to him about borrowing;
It seemed so, by his countenance.
But nonetheless, by God, our heavenly king,
I thought not to ask any thing of him.
I pray thee, wife, do so no more;
Tell me always, before I go from thee,
If any debtor has in my absence
Paid thee, lest through thy negligence
I might ask of him a thing that he has paid."
This wife was not afeared nor afraid,
But boldly she said, and that immediately,
"By Mary, I defy the false monk, Don John!
I care not a bit for his proofs;
He gave me a specific amount of gold, that I know well --
What! Evil luck on his monk's snout!
For, God knows it, I thought, without doubt,
That he had given it to me because of you
To do (something) with it for my honor and my benefit,
Because of kinship, and also for the good cheer
That he has had very many times here.
But since I see I stand in this difficulty,
I will answer you shortly to the point.
You have more slow-paying debtors than I am!
For I will pay you well and readily
From day to day, and if it so be that I fail,
I am your wife; score it upon my tally (tail),
And I shall pay as soon as ever I can.
For by my troth, I have on my clothing,
And not on waste, spent every bit;
And because I have spent it so well
For your honor, for God's sake, I say,
Do not be angry, but let us laugh and play.
You shall have my pretty body as a pledge;
By God, I will not pay you except in bed!
Forgive me, my own dear spouse;
Turn hitherward, and cheer up."
This merchant saw there was no remedy,
And to chide would be nothing but folly,
Since the thing can not be amended.
"Now wife," he said, "and I forgive thee;
But, by thy life, be no longer so generous.
Take better care of thy goods, this I give thee as a command."
Thus ends my tale, and God send us 
Tallying (Tailing) enough unto our lives' end. Amen
"Well said, by the body of our Lord," said our Host,
"Now long may thou sail by the coast,
Sir gentle master, gentle mariner!
God give the monk a thousand cartloads of bad years!
A ha! Fellows, beware of such a trick!
The monk made a monkey of the man,
And of his wife as well, by Saint Augustine!
Invite no more monks into your dwelling.
"But now pass over that, and let us look around to see
Who shall now, first of all this company, tell 
Another tale;" and with that word he said,
As courteously as if he had been a maiden,
"My Lady Prioress, by your leave,
If I knew I should not grieve you,
I would judge that you should tell 
A tale next, if it so were that you would.
Now will you grant this, my lady dear?"
"Gladly," said she, and said as you shall hear.
ALIGN=top></A></LEFT> Texts on this page prepared and maintained by L. D. Benson <A HREF="mailto:ldb@wjh.harvard.edu">(ldb@wjh.harvard.edu)</A> 
