The minister and the nurse of vices,
Which men call in English Idleness,
Who is porter of the gate of pleasures
To shun, and by her contrary to overcome her --
That is to say, by keeping busy in lawful good works --
Well ought we to do all our diligence
Lest the fiend by means of idleness seize us.
For he that with his thousand sly snares
Continually lies in wait to seize us suddenly,
When he can espy a man in idleness,
He can catch him in his trap so quickly,
That until a man is seized right by the hem of his garment,
He is not aware that the fiend has him in hand.
Well ought we to work and resist idleness.
And even though people never dreaded to die,
Yet they can well see by reason, doubtless,
That idleness is rotten laziness,
From which there never comes any good or profit;
And since sloth holds her (Idleness) on a leash
(Allowing her) only to sleep, and to eat and drink,
And to devour all that others earn by working,
And in order to set us apart from such idleness,
Which is the cause of such great ruin,
I have here done my faithful efforts
In translating the legend 
Correctly of thy glorious life and suffering,
Thou with thy garland made with rose and lily --
I mean thee, maid and martyr, Saint Cecilie.
Invocacio ad Mariam
(Invocation to Mary)
And thou who art the flower of all virgins,
Of whom it so well pleased Bernard to write,
To thee at my beginning first I call;
Thou comfort of us wretches, let me narrate
Thy maiden's death, that won by means of her merit
The eternal life and victory over the fiend,
As one may hereafter read in her story.
Thou Maid and Mother, daughter of thy Son,
Thou well of mercy, sinful souls' cure,
In whom God for goodness chose to dwell,
Thou humble, and high over every creature,
Thou so greatly enobled our nature,
That the Maker of humankind had no disdain 
To clothe and wrap His Son in blood and flesh.
Within the blissful cloister of thy sides
The eternal love and peace took man's shape,
He who is lord and guide of the threefold universe,
Whom earth and sea and heaven unceasing 
Ever praise; and thou, Virgin without blemish,
Bore in thy body -- and remained maiden pure --
The Creator of every creature.
Magnificence is in thee combined 
With mercy, goodness, and with such pity
That thou, who art the sun of excellence
Not only helpest them that pray thee,
But often of thy goodness 
Very willingly, before men beseech thine help,
Thou goest before and art their lives' physician.
Now, thou meek and blissful fair maid help
Me, banished exile, in this desert of bitterness;
Think on the Cananite woman, who said
That dogs eat some of all the crumbs
That from their lord's table are fallen;
And though that I, unworthy son of Eve,
Be sinful, yet accept my faith.
And, because faith is dead without works,
Give me wit and opportunity to work so,
That I may be free from that place that is most dark!
O thou, that art so fair and full of grace,
Be my advocate in that high place
Where unceasingly is sung "Hosanna,"
Thou Christ's mother, daughter dear of Anne!
And of thy light enlighten in prison my soul,
That is troubled by the contamination 
Of my body, and also by the weight
Of earthly lust and false desires;
O haven of refuge, O salvation
Of those who are in sorrow and in distress,
Now help, for to my work I will address myself.
Yet I pray you who read what I write,
Forgive me that I make no effort
To narrate this same story elaborately,
For I have both the words and the meaning 
Of him who out of reverence for the saint
Wrote the story, and  (I) follow her legend,
And pray you that you will correct (any errors in) my work.
Interpretacio nominis Cecile quam ponit Frater
Jacobus Januensis in Legenda
Jacob of Genoa put in the Legend.)
First the name of Saint Cecilie I would to you 
Explain, as one can see in her story.
It is to say in English "heaven's lily,"
For pure chastity of virginity;
Or, because she had whiteness because of chastity,
And green because of conscience and of good reputation
The sweet smell, "lily" was her name.
Or Cecilie is to mean "the way for the blind,"
Because she set an example by good teaching;
Or else Cecile, as I written find,
Is joined, by a sort of combination
Of "heaven" and "Leah"; and here, symbolically,
The "heaven" is set for her holiness of thought,
And "Leah" for her constant business.
Cecile may also be explained in this manner,
"Lack of blindness," for her great light
Of wisdom and for her pure morals;
Or else, lo, this maidens bright name 
Comes from "heaven" and "leos," for which rightly
Men could well call her "the heaven of people,"
Exemplar of all good and wise works.
For "leos" in English means "people,"
And just as men may in the heaven see
The sun and moon and stars in every direction,
Just so in this maiden men spiritually
See the greatness of spirit of faith,
And also the complete clarity of wisdom,
And various works, bright because of their excellence.
And just as these scientists write
That heaven is swift and round and also burning,
Just so was fair Cecilie the white
Very swift and busy ever in good works,
And round and whole in persevering in good (works),
And burning ever in very bright charity.
Now have I declared to you what she was called.
Explicit 
(Here ends [the Prologue])
This bright maiden Cecilie, as her Life says,
Was descended from Romans and of noble birth,
And from her cradle nurtured up in the faith
Of Christ, and bore his gospel in her mind.
She never ceased, as I written find,
Of her prayer and God to love and dread,
Beseeching him to preserve her virginity.
And when this maiden should unto a man
Wedded be, who was very young of age,
Who was called Valerian,
And the day of her marriage was come,
She, very devout and humble in her spirit,
Under her robe of gold, that became her very well, 
Had next to her flesh clad herself in a hair shirt.
And while the organs made melody,
To God alone in heart thus sang she:
"O Lord, my soul and also my body preserve
Immaculate, lest that I be damned."
And for his love who died upon the cross
Every second and third day she fasted,
Ever praying in her prayers very earnestly.
The night came, and to bed must she go
With her husband, as often is the manner,
And privately to him she said at once,
"O sweet and well beloved spouse dear,
There is a secret, if you want to hear it,
Which I am very eager to say to you,
Providing that you swear you shall not reveal it."
Valerian did earnestly unto her swear
That for no occasion nor thing that might be,
He should never ever betray her;
And then for the first time to him thus said she:
"I have an angel who loves me,
Who with great love, whether I wake or sleep,
Is always ready to guard my body.
"And if he may sense, withoubt doubt,
That you touch me, or love me lecherously,
He straightway will slay you in the act,
And in your youth thus you shall die;
And if you preserve me in chaste love,
He will love you as (he loves) me, for your chastity,
And show you his joy and his brightness."
Valerian, corrected as God would (have it),
Answered in reply, "If I must trust thee,
Let me see that angel and behold him;
And if it be a true angel,
Then will I do as thou hast prayed me;
And if thou love another man, in truth
Then truly with this sword will I slay you both."
Cecile answered immediately in this manner:
"If you wish, you shall see the angel,
Provided that you believe in Christ and have yourself baptized.
Go forth to the Appian Way," said she,
"That from this town stands no more than three miles,
And to the poor folks that dwell there,
Say to them exactly thus, which I shall tell you.
"Tell them that I, Cecile, sent you to them 
To show you the good Urban the old,
For secret needs and for a good purpose.
And when you have beheld Saint Urban,
Tell him the words which I told to you;
And when he has cleansed you of sin (by baptism),
Then you shall see that angel, ere you depart."
Valerian has gone to the place,
And just as he was taught by his learning (from Cecilie),
He immediately found this holy old Urban 
In hiding among the saints' burial places.
And he immediately without delay
Said his message; and when he told it,
Urban for joy did hold up his hands.
He let the tears fall from his eyes.
"Almighty Lord, O Jesus Christ," said he,
"Sower of chaste counsel, shepherd of us all,
The fruit of that same seed of chastity
That thou hast sown in Cecile, take to thee!
Lo, like a busy bee, without guile,
Always thine own servant Cecile serves Thee.
"For that same spouse that she took just now
Very like a fierce lion, she sends here,
As meek as ever was any lamb, to you!"
And with that word anon there did appear
An old man, clad in clear white clothes,
Who had in hand a book with lettering of gold ,
And did stand before Valerian.
When he saw him, and the  old man picked him up then,
And from his book right thus he began to read:
"One Lord, one faith, one God, without more,
One baptism, and Father of all also,
Above all and over all everywhere."
These words were written all with gold.
When this was read, then said this old man,
"Dost thou believe this thing or not? Say yes or no."
"I believe all this thing," said Valerian,
"For truer thing than this, I dare well say,
No person under the heaven can imagine."
Then vanished this old man, he knew not where,
And Pope Urban christened him right there.
Valerian goes home and finds Cecilie
Within his room standing with an angel. 
This angel had of roses and of lily
Two crowns, which he bore in hand;
And first to Cecile, as I understand,
He gave that one, and after he did give
That other to Valerian, her mate.
"With body clean and with unblemished thought
Always guard well these crowns," said he;
"From paradise I have brought them to you,
Nor never ever shall they be rotten,
Nor lose their sweet fragrance, trust me;
Nor never a person shall see them with his eye,
Unless he be chaste and hates villainy.
"And thou, Valerian, because thou so soon
Assented to good counsel also,
Say what pleases thee, and thou shalt have thy request."
"I have a brother," said Valerian then,
"And in this world I love no man so much.
I pray you that my brother may have grace
To know the truth, as I do in this place."
The angel said, "God likes thy request,
And both (of you) with the palm of martyrdom
You shall come unto his blissful feast."
And with that word Tiburce his brother came.
And when he perceived the fragrance,
Which the roses and the lilies cast forth
Within his heart he began to wonder intently,
And said, "I wonder, this time of the year,
Whence that sweet fragrance comes so (much)
Of rose and lilies that I smell here.
For even if I had them in my two hands,
The fragrance could go in me no deeper.
The sweet smell that in my heart I find
Has changed me all into another nature."
Valerian said: "Two crowns have we,
Snow white and rose red, that shine clear,
Which thine eyes have no power to see;
And as thou smellest them because of my prayer,
So shalt thou see them, beloved brother dear,
If it so be thou will, without delaying,
Believe correctly and know real truth."
Tiburce answered, "Sayest thou this to me
In actuality, or do I hear this in dream?"
"In dreams," said Valerian, "have we been
Until this time, my brother, indeed.
But now for the first time our dwelling is in truth."
"How knowest thou this?" said Tiburce, "and in what manner?"
Said Valerian, "That I shall tell thee.
"The angel of God has taught me the truth
Which thou shalt see, if thou wilt renounce
The idols and be chaste, and otherwise nothing (will you see.)"
And of the miracle of these two crowns
Saint Ambrose in his preface is pleased to speak;
Solemnly this noble dear Doctor (of the Church)
Commends it, and says in this manner:
"In order to receive the palm of martyrdom,
Saint Cecile, completely filled with God's gift,
The world and also her bed-chamber did she give up;
Witness Tyburce's and Valerian's confession,
To which God of his goodness would provide
Two crowns of flowers well smelling,
And made his angel bring them the crowns.
"The maid has brought these men to bliss above;
The world has known what it is worth, certainly,
To love a devotion to chastity."
Then Cecile showed him all open and plain
That all idols are but meaningless things,
For they are dumb, and moreover they are deaf,
And (she) ordered him to leave his idols.
"Whoever believes not this, he is a beast,"
Tiburce then said, "if I shall not lie."
And she who heard this did kiss his breast,
And was very glad he could perceive truth.
"This day I take thee for my kinsman,"
Said this blissful fair maid dear,
And after that she said as you may hear:
"Lo, exactly as the love of Christ," said she,
"Made me thy brother's wife, exactly in that manner
Right now here I take thee for my kinsman,
Since thou will despise thine idols.
Go with thy brother now, and get thyself baptized,
And make thyself clean, so that thou can behold
The angel's face of which thy brother told."
Tiburce answered and said, "Brother dear,
First tell me where I must go, and to what man?"
"To whom?" said he, "come forth with right good cheer, 
I will lead thee unto the Pope Urban."
"To Urban? My brother Valerian,"
Said then Tiburce, "wilt thou lead me there?
It seems to me that it would be a wonderful deed.
"Thou meanest not Urban," said he then,
"That is so often condemned to be dead,
And dwells in hiding places always (going) from one to another, 
And dares not once put forth his head?
Men should burn him in a fire so red
If he were found, or if men could catch sight of him,
And we too (would burn), to bear him company;
"And while we seek that same divinity
That is hidden secretly in heaven,
Nevertheless we shall be burned in this world!"
To whom Cecile answered boldly,
"Men might well and reasonably fear
To lose this life, my own dear brother,
If this were the only life and (there were) none other.
"But there is a better life in another place,
That never shall be lost, doubt thee not,
Which God's Son told us by means of his grace. 
That Father's Son has created all things,
And all that is created (and endowed) with the power of reason;
The Holy Ghost, who from the Father did proceed,
Has given them souls, without any doubt.
"By word and by miracle high God's Son,
When he was in this world, declared here
That there was another life where men may dwell."
To whom answered Tiburce, "O sister dear,
Said thou not just now in this manner,
There is but one God, lord in truthfulness?
And now of three how canst thou bear witness?"
"That shall I tell," said she, "ere I go.
Exactly as a man has three mental faculties --
Memory, imagination, and judgement also --
So in one being of divinity,
Three persons may right well be there."
Then very zealously she did preach to him 
Of Christ's coming, and teach (him) of His pains,
And many particulars of His passion;
How God's Son was compelled to remain in this world 
To provide full forgiveness for mankind,
Which was bound in sin and painful cares;
All this thing she told unto Tiburce.
And after this Tiburce with a good will
With Valerian he went to Pope Urban,
Who thanked God, and with glad and happy heart 
He christened him and made him in that place
Perfect in his learning, God's knight.
And after this Tiburce got such grace
That every day in real time and space he saw 
The angel of God; and every manner of gift
That he asked of God was provided immediately.
It would be very hard in proper sequence to say
How many wonders Jesus made for them;
But at the last, to tell short and plain,
The officers of the law of the town of Rome sought them,
And brought them before Almache, the prefect,
Who questioned them, and knew all their thought,
And sent them to the image of Jupiter,
And said, "Whoever will not sacrifice,
Strike off his head; this is my sentence here."
Immediately these martyrs of whom I tell you,
One Maximus, that was an officer
Of the prefect's, and his chief assistant,
Seized them, and when he led forth the saints,
He himself wept for pity that he had.
When Maximus had heard the saints' teaching,
He got himself permission of the executioners, 
And led them to his house without more delay,
And with their preaching, ere that it was evening,
They did take away from the executioners,
And from Maxime, and from his folk each one of them,
The false faith, (and brought them) to believe in God alone.
Cecile came, when it was grown night,
With priests who christened them all together;
And afterward, when day was grown light,
Cecile said to them with a full steadfast countenance,
"Now, Christ's own knights beloved and dear,
Cast away all the works of darkness,
And arm yourselves in armor of brightness.
"You have truly done a great battle,
Your race is done, your faith you have maintained.
Go to the crown of life that can not fail;
The rightful Judge, whom you have served,
Shall give it to you, as you have deserved it."
And when this thing was said as I tell,
Men led them forth to do the sacrifice.
But when they were brought to the place 
To tell shortly the conclusion,
They would not incense nor sacrifice in any way,
But on their knees they set themselves down
With humble heart and steadfast devotion,
And lost both their heads in the place.
Their souls went to the King of grace.
This Maximus, who saw this thing happen,
With piteous tears told it right away,
That he saw their souls glide to heaven 
With angels full of clearness and of light,
And with his word converted many a person;
For which Almachius had him so beaten
With whip tipped with lead that he left his life.
Cecile took him and buried him straightway
By Tiburce and Valerian tenderly
Within their burying place, under the tombstone;
And after this, Almachius hastily
Ordered his ministers to fetch publicly 
Cecile, so that she might in his presence
Do sacrifice and burn incense to Jupiter.
But they, converted by her wise teaching,
Wept very bitterly, and gave full credence
Unto her word, and cried more and more,
"Christ, God's Son, without difference [between Father and Son],
Is true God -- this is the belief of us all -- 
That has so good a servant to serve Him.
This unanimously we believe, even if we should die!"
Almachius, that heard of this business,
Ordered (his men to) fetch Cecile, so that he might see her
And first of all, lo, this was his quesation.
"What sort of woman art thou?" then said he.
"I am a gentle woman born," said she.
"I ask thee," said he, "though it may grieve thee,
About thy religion and about thy belief."
"You have begun your question foolishly,"
Said she, "you who would include two answers 
In one question; you asked ignorantly."
Almache answered unto that refutation,
"Of whence comes thine answering so rude?"
"Of whence?" said she, when she was asked,
"Of conscience and of sincere good faith."
Almachius said, "Takest thou no heed
Of my power?" And she answered him this:
"Your might," said she, "is very little to fear,
For every mortal man's power is nothing 
But only like a bladder full of wind, indeed.
For with a needle's point, when it is blown up,
Can all the arrogance of it be laid full low."
"Full wrongfully thou began," said he,
"And yet wrongful is thy perseverance.
Dost thou not know how our mighty noble princes
Have thus commanded and made a law
That every Christian person shall be punished
Unless he renounce his Christian faith,
And go all free, if he will deny it?"
"Your princes err, as your nobles do,"
Said then Cecile, "and with a crazy verdict
You make us guilty, and it is not true.
For you, who know well our innocence,
Forasmuch as we do reverence
To Christ, and because we bear a Christian name,
You accuse us of a crime and also (put on us) the blame for it.
"But we who know that same name 
To be so virtuous, we can not deny it."
Almache answered, "Chose one of these two:
Do sacrifice, or renounce Christendom,
So that thou can now escape by that means."
At which the holy blissful fair maid
Began to laugh, and to the judge said:
"O judge, confused in thy folly,
Wilt thou that I renounce innocence,
To make myself a wicked person?" said she.
"Lo, he hides his true feelings here in open court; 
He stares, and goes mad in his mind!"
To whom Almachius, "Miserable wretch,
Knowest thou not how far my power can stretch?
"Have not our mighty princes to me given,
Yea, both power and authority
To make folk to die or to live?
Why speakest thou so proudly then to me?"
"I speak only faithfully," said she;
"Not proudly, for I say, as for my side,
We hate that same deadly sin of pride.
"And if thou dread not to hear a truth,
Then will I show all openly, according to law,
That thou hast made a very great lie here.
Thou sayest thy princes have given thee power
Both to slay and to give life to a person;
Thou, who can only take away life,
Thou hast no other power nor any authority.
"But thou can say thy princes have made thee
Minister of death; for if thou speak of more,
Thou liest, for thy power is strictly limited.
"Do away thy boldness," said Almachius then,
"And sacrifice to our gods ere thou go!
I care not what wrong that thou may express to me,
For I can suffer it as a philosopher;
"But those same wrongs I can not endure
Which thou spekest of our gods here," said he.
Cecile answered, "O foolish creature!
Thou saidest no word since thou spoke to me
That I did not know therewith thy foolishness
And that thou were in every sort of way
An ignorant officer and a foolish judge.
"There lacks nothing to thine outer eyes
Except that thou art blind; for thing that we all see 
That it is stone -- that men can well see --
That same stone a god thou wilt call it.
I advise thee, let thine hand upon it fall
And taste it well, and stone thou shalt find it,
Since thou seest not with thy blind eyes.
"It is a shame that the people shall
So scorn thee and laugh at thy folly,
For without exception men know it well everywhere
That mighty God is in his high heavens;
And these images, thou canst well see,
Can do no profit to thee nor to themselves,
For in fact they are not worth a penny."
These words and others such said she,
And he grew angry, and ordered that men should lead her
Home to her house, and "In her house," said he,
"Burn her right in a bath of red flames."
And as he ordered, exactly so the deed was done;
For they did shut her fast in a cauldron,
And night and day they fed great fire under it.
The long night, and also a day as well,
Despite the fire and also the bath's heat 
She sat all cool and felt no pain.
It made her not a drop to sweat.
But in that bath her life she must leave,
For that Almachius, with completely wicked intent,
Sent his messenger to slay her in the bath.
Three strokes in the neck he smote her then,
The executioner, but in no sort of way
He could not smite all her neck in two;
And because there was that time an ordinance
That no man should do any one such pain
The fourth stroke to smite, soft or sore,
This executioner dared not do any more,
But half dead, with her neck carved there,
He left her lie, and on his way he went.
The Christian folk, who were about her,
With sheets have very carefully taken up the blood.
Three days she lived in this torment,
And never ceased to teach them the faith 
That she had fostered; to them she did preach,
And she gave them her personal property and her things,
And to the Pope Urban (she) entrusted them then,
And said, "I asked this of heaven's king,
To have respite three days and no more
To commend to you, ere I go,
These souls, lo, and that I might have made
Here of my house perpetually a church."
Saint Urban with his deacons secretly
Fetched the body and buried it by night
Among his other saints decently.
Her house is called the church of Saint Cecilie;
Saint Urban consecrated it, as he well could;
In which, unto this day, in noble manner,
People do service to Christ and to his saint.
