"Squire, come nearer, if it be your will,
And say something about love, for certainly you
Know as much about that as any man."
"Nay, sir," said he, "but I will speak as I can
With a hearty will, for I will not rebel
Against your desire; a tale I will tell.
Have me excused if I speak amiss;
My will is good, and lo, my tale is this."
At Sarray, in the land of Tartars,
There dwelt a king who waged war on Russia,
Through which there died many a doughty man.
This noble king was called Cambyuskan,
Who in his time was of such great renown
That there was nowhere in any region
So excellent a lord in all things:
He lacked nothing that is appropriate to a king.
In accord with the religion in which he was born
He kept its law, to which he was sworn;
And moreover he was hardy, wise, and rich,
And compassionate and just, always impartial;
Truthful of his word, benign, and honorable;
Of his heart as stable as the center of any circle;
Young, vigorous, and strong, in arms as desirous (to excel)
As any young knight of all his household.
He was a handsome person and fortunate,
And always so well maintained the splendor appropriate to his rank
That there was nowhere such another man.
This noble king, this Tartar Cambyuskan,
Had two sons on Elpheta his wife,
Of whom the eldest was called Algarsyf;
That other son was called Cambalo.
A daughter had this worthy king also,
That youngest was, and was called Canacee.
But to tell you all her beauty,
It lies not in my tongue, nor in my abilities;
I dare not undertake so high a thing.
My English also is insufficient.
He must be an excellent rhetorician
Who knows his figures of speech appropriate to that art,
If he should describe her in every detail.
I am none such, I must speak as I can.
And it so befell that when this Cambyuskan
Has twenty winters borne his diadem,
As he was accustomed from year to year, I suppose,
He had the feast of his nativity
Proclaimed throughout Sarray his city,
Exactly March 15, in the ordinary course of the year.
Phoebus the sun full jolly was and clear,
For he was near his position of greatest power
In Mars' face and in his astrological house
In Aries, the choleric hot sign.
Full pleasant was the weather and mild,
For which the fowls, in response to the bright sun,
What for the season and the young greenery,
Full loudly sang of their desires.
They seemed to have gotten themselves protections
Against the sword of winter, keen and cold.
This Cambyuskan, of whom I have you told,
In royal vestments sits on his dais,
With diadem, full nobly in his palace,
And holds his feast so solemn and so rich
That in this world there was none like it;
Of which if I should tell all the festivities,
Then would it occupy a summer's day,
And also it is not necessary to describe
At every course the order of their service.
I will not tell of their strange stews,
Nor of their swans, nor of their young herons.
Also in that land, as old knights tell,
There is some food that is considered very delicious
That in this land is reckoned of but little value;
There is no man that can report all.
I will not tarry you, for it is nine a.m.
And because it is not essential to the tale but a loss of time;
Unto my first topic I will return.
And so it befell that after the third course,
While this king sits thus in his nobility,
Listening to his minstrels playing their instruments
Before him at the table delightfully,
In at the hall door all suddenly
There came a knight upon a steed of brass,
And in his hand a broad mirror of glass.
Upon his thumb he had of gold a ring,
And by his side a naked sword hanging;
And up he rides to the high table.
In all the hall there was not spoken a word
For marveling at this knight; him to behold
Full intently they gaze, young and old.
This strange knight, who came thus suddenly,
All armed, except his head, full richly,
Salutes king and queen and all the lords,
In the order in which they sat in the hall,
With such high reverence and respect,
As well in speech as in countenance,
That Gawain, with his old courtesy,
Though he were come again out of Fairyland,
Could not amend one word of his speech.
And after this, before the high table,
He with a manly voice said his message,
In accordance with the form used in his language,
Without one mistake of syllable or of letter;
And in order that his tale should seem the better,
Conforming to his words was his facial expression,
As teaches the art of speech to those who learn it.
Although I can not imitate his style,
Nor can not climb over so high a stile,
Yet say I this, as to his general meaning:
Thus much amounts all that ever he meant (to say),
If it so be that I have it (correctly) in mind.
He said, "The king of Araby and of India,
My liege lord, on this solemn day
Salutes you, as he best knows how and can,
And sends you, in honor of your feast,
By me, who am all ready to obey your command,
This steed of brass, that easily and well
Can in the space of one natural day --
This is to say, in four and twenty hours --
Where-ever you desire, in drought or else showers,
Bear your body into every place
To which your heart wishes to go,
Without harm to you, through foul or fair;
Or, if you desire to fly as high in the air
As does an eagle when he desires to soar,
This same steed shall bear you ever more,
Without harm, until you be where you wished,
Though you sleep or rest on his back,
And return again with twisting of a peg.
He who made it knew full many an ingenious contrivance.
He observed many a configuration of the stars
Before he had finished this operation,
And knew full many a magical seal and many a controlling force.
"This mirror also, that I have in my hand,
Has such a power that men can in it see
When there shall befall any adversity
Unto your reign or to yourself also,
And clearly who is your friend or foe.
"And in addition to all this, if any fair lady
Has set her heart on any sort of creature,
If he be false, she shall his treason see,
His new love, and all his trickery,
So clearly that there shall no thing be hidden.
For this reason, (to protect) against this amorous spring time,
This mirror and this ring, that you can see,
He has sent to my lady Canacee,
Your excellent daughter that is here.
"The power of the ring, if you will hear,
Is this: that if she wishes to wear it
Upon her thumb or bear it in her purse,
There is no fowl that flies under the heaven
That she shall not well understand his speech,
And know his meaning openly and plain,
And answer him in his language in reply;
And every herb that grows upon root
She shall also know, and to whom it will provide a remedy,
Although his wounds be ever so deep and wide.
"This naked sword, that hangs by my side,
Such power has that whatever man you smite
Throughout his armor it will carve and bite,
Were it as thick as is a branched oak;
And whatever man that is wounded by the stroke
Shall never be whole until you please, out of kindness,
To stroke him with the flat side in that same place
Where he is hurt; this is as much to say,
You must with the blunt side of the sword again
Stroke him in the wound, and it will close.
This is a very truth, without lying;
It fails not while it is in your possesion."
And when this knight has thus his tale told,
He rides out of hall and down he alit.
His steed, which shone like the bright sun,
Stands in the court, still as any stone.
This knight is to his chamber led straightway,
And is unarmed, and set to dinner.
The presents are full royally fetched --
This is to say, the sword and the mirror --
And carried straightway into the high tower
By certain officers appointed for this purpose;
And unto Canacee this ring is carried
Solemnly, where she sits at the table.
But truly, without any lie,
The horse of brass, that can not be moved,
It stands as if it were glued to the ground.
No man there can drive it out of the place
Despite any contrivance of windlass or pulley;
And the reason why? Because they do not know the craft.
And therefore in the place they have it left
Until the knight has taught them the manner
To remove him, as you shall later hear.
Great was the crowd that swarms to and fro
To stare on this horse that stands so,
For it
So well proportioned to be strong,
Exactly as if it were a steed of Lombardy;
In
As if it were a noble Apulian courser.
For certainly, from his tail unto his ear
Nature nor art could him not amend
To any extent, as all the people believed.
But evermore their greatest wonder was
How it could move, and yet was of brass;
It was from fairyland, as it seemed to the people.
Diverse folk diversely they deemed;
As many heads, as many opinions there are.
They murmured as does a swarm of bees,
And made arguments according to their fantasies,
Retelling these old poems,
And said it was like the Pegasus,
The hors that had wings in order to fly;
Or else it was Sinon the Greek's horse,
That brought Troy to destruction,
As men in these old romances read.
"My heart," said one, "is evermore in dread;
I believe some men of arms are in there,
That prepare themselves to conquer this city.
It would be very good if all such things were known."
Another whispered to his fellow quietly,
And said, "He lies, for it is rather like
An illusion made by some magic,
Such as conjurers play at these great feasts."
Of various conjectures thus they chatter and debate,
As ignorant people speculate commonly
Of things that are made more subtly
Than they in their ignorance can comprehend;
They habitually suppose the worse.
And some of them wondered about the mirror,
That was carried up into the principal tower,
How men might in it see such things.
Another answered and said it might well be
Naturally, by arrangements
Of angles and of ingenious reflections,
And said that in Rome was such a one.
They speak of Alocen, and Vitulon,
And Aristotle, that wrote while they lived
Of intricate mirrors and of optical lenses,
As know they who have heard their books (read aloud).
And other folk have wondered on the sword
That would pierce throughout every thing,
And fell in speech of Thelophus the king,
And of Achilles with his magical spear,
For he could with it both heal and harm,
Exactly in such a way as men may do with the sword
Of which right now you have yourselves heard.
They speak of various ways of hardening of metal,
And speak of chemicals moreover,
And how and when it should be hardened,
Which is unknown, at least unto me.
Then they speak of Canacee's ring,
And all said that such a wondrous thing
Of the craft of making rings they never heard anything,
Save that he Moses and king Solomon
Had a reputation for cunning in such art.
Thus say the people and draw themselves aside.
But nonetheless some said that it was
Wondrous to make glass out of ashes of fern,
And yet glass is not like ashes of fern;
But, because they have known it so long,
Therefore ceases their chattering and their wonder.
As intensely some wonder about the cause of thunder,
About ebb tide, about flood tide, about spider webs, and about mist,
And all things, until the cause is known.
Thus they chatter, and conjecture, and speculate
Until the king did from the table arise.
Phebus (the sun) has left the noon-time angle,
And yet ascending was the beast royal,
The noble Lion, with his star Aldiran,
When this Tarter king, Cambyuskan,
Rose from his table, where he sat full high.
Before him goes the loud music
Until he came to his chamber of tapestries (Presence Chamber),
Where they sound diverse instruments
That it is like a heaven to hear.
Now dance lusty Venus's children dear,
For in the Fish (Pisces) their lady sat full high,
And looks on them with a friendly eye.
This noble king is set upon his throne.
This foreign knight is fetched to him right away,
And on the dance he goes with Canacee.
Here is the revel and the jollity
That a dull-witted man is not able to describe.
He must have known love and its service
And be a convivial man as gay as May,
That should describe for you such splendor.
Who could tell you the form of dances
So strange, and such cheerful countenances,
Such subtle looking and dissimulations
For dread of jealous men's perceptions?
No man but Launcelot, and he is dead.
Therefore I pass over all this pleasure;
I say no more, but in this jollity
I leave them until people go to the supper.
The steward ordered the spiced cakes to be brought quickly,
And also the wine, amid all this music.
The ushers and the squires are gone,
The spiced cakes and the wine are come quickly.
They eat and drink, and when this had an end,
Unto the temple, as was reasonable, they wend.
The service done, they sup all day long.
What need is there to tell you their splendor?
Each man knows well that a king's feast
Has plenty for the highest ranks and for the lowest,
And dainties more than are in my knowing.
At after-supper goes this noble king
To see this horse of brass, with all in a crowd
Of lords and of ladies about him.
Such wondering was there about this horse of brass
That since the great siege of Troy was,
Where men wondered about a horse also,
Nor was there such a wondering as was then.
But finally the king asks this knight
About the power of this courser and the might,
And prayed him to tell how to control him.
This horse at once began to trip and dance,
When this knight laid hand upon his rein,
And said, "Sir, there is no more to say,
But, when you desire to ride anywhere,
You must turn a peg, which stands in his ear,
Which I shall you tell between us two(secretly).
You must name him to what place also,
Or to what country, that you want to ride.
And when you come where you desire to abide,
Bid him descend, and turn another peg,
For therein lies the essence of working the device,
And he will down descend and do your will,
And in that place he will abide still.
Though all the world the contrary had sworn,
He shall not thence be drawn nor carried away.
Or, if you wish to bid him go thence,
Turn this peg, and he will vanish at once
Out of the sight of every sort of creature,
And come again, be it by day or night,
When you wish to call him again
In such a manner as I shall to you say
Between you and me, and that very soon.
Ride when you wish; there is nothing more to do."
When the king was informed by that knight,
And has correctly understood
The manner and the form of all this matter,
Full glad and blithe, this noble doughty king
Returns to his revel as before.
The bridle is carried unto the tower
And kept among his jewels precious and dear.
The horse vanished, I know not in what manner,
Out of their sight; you get no more from me.
But thus I leave in pleasure and jollity
This Cambyuskan entertaining his lords
Until well nigh the day began to spring.
The nurse of digestion, the sleep,
Did on them wink (as a signal) and bad them take notice
That much drink and activity make rest necessary;
And with a yawning mouth he kissed them all,
And said that it was time to lie down,
For blood (the humor) was in its domination.
"Cherish blood, nature's friend," said he.
They thank him yawning, by two, by three,
And every creature did draw himself to his rest,
As sleep them bad; they took it for the best.
Their dreams shall not now be told for me;
Their heads were full of fumes from drinking wine,
That causes dreams of which there is no significance.
They sleep until it was nine a.m.,
The most part, except for Canacee.
She was very temperate, as women are;
For of her father had she taken leave
To go to rest soon after it was evening.
She did not wish to be grown pale,
Nor in the morning to appear unfestive,
And slept her first sleep, and then awoke.
For such a joy she in her heart took
Both of her strange ring and her mirror,
That twenty times she changed her color;
And in her sleep, directly because of the mental impression
Made by her mirror, she had a vision.
Therefore, before the sun did glide upward,
She called on her governess who was beside her,
And said that she wished to rise.
These old women who are customarily wise,
As is her governess, answered her at once,
And said, "Madame, whither do you wish to go
Thus early, for the folk are all in bed?"
"I want," said she, "to arise -- for I desire
No longer to sleep -- and walk about."
Her governess calls a great crowd of women,
And up they rise, a good ten or twelve;
Up rises fresh Canacee herself,
As ruddy and bright(ly shining) as does the young sun,
That in the Ram is four degrees up run --
No higher was he when she was ready --
And forth she walks at an easy pace,
Clothed, in accord with the lusty season sweet,
Lightly, to amuse herself and walk on foot,
With no more than five or six of her entourage;
And in a path forth in the park goes she.
The vapor that glided up from the earth
Made the sun seem ruddy and broad;
But nonetheless it was so fair a sight
That it made all their hearts to lighten,
What for the season and the dawning,
And for the fowls that she heard sing.
For right away she knew what they meant
Exactly by their song, and knew all their meaning.
The main point for which every tale is told,
If it is delayed until the desire (to hear it) is cold
Of those who have listened to it for a long time,
The taste (for it) passes away more and more,
Because of the overabundance of its prolixity;
And by the same reason, it seems to me,
I should proceed to the main point,
And quickly put an end to her walking.
In a tree, for dryness as white as chalk,
As Canacee was amusing herself in her walk,
There sat a falcon over her head full high,
That with a pitiful voice so did cry
That all the wood resounded with her cry.
She had beaten herself so pitifully
With both her wings until the red blood
Ran down the length of the tree in which she stood.
And continually she cried always and shrieked,
And with her beak herself she so stabbed
That there is no tiger, nor any beast so cruel
That dwells either in wood or in forest,
That would not have wept, if he could weep,
For sorrow of her, she shrieked always so loud.
For there was never yet no man alive,
If I could well describe a falcon,
That heard of its equal in beauty,
As well in plumage as in nobility
In shape, in all that might reckoned be.
From foreign land; and repeatedly, as she stood,
She swoons every now and then for lack of blood,
Until well nigh is she fallen from the tree.
This fair king's daughter, Canacee,
That on her finger bore the strange ring,
Through which she well understood every thing
That any fowl may in his language say,
And could answer him in his language in return,
Has understood what this falcon said,
And well nigh for the pity she almost died.
And to the tree she goes full hastily,
And on this falcon looks compassionately,
And spread wide her skirt, for well she knew
The falcon must fall from the branch,
When it swooned next, for lack of blood.
Until at the last she spoke in this manner
Unto the hawk, as you shall after hear:
"What is the cause, if it may be told,
That you be in this pain such as the Furies suffer in hell?"
Said Canacee unto this hawk above.
"Is this for sorrow of death or loss of love?
For, as I believe, these are the two causes
That most cause woe to a gentle heart;
Of other harm there is no need to speak.
For you avenge yourself upon yourself,
Which proves well that either anger or fear
Must be the reason for your cruel deed,
Since I see no other creature hunt you.
For love of God, spare yourself,
Or what can be your help? For west nor east
I saw never ere now no bird nor beast
That treated himself so piteously.
You slay me with your sorrow truly,
I have of you such great compassion.
For God's love, come down from the tree;
And as I am a king's daughter true,
If that I truly knew the cause
Of your malady, if it lay in my power,
I would amend it ere it were night,
So help me great God of nature!
And herbs shall I in abundance find
With which to heal your hurts quickly."
Then shrieked this falcon yet more pitifully
Than ever she did, and fell to ground straightway,
And lies in a swoon, dead and like a stone,
Until Canacee has in her lap her taken
Until the time she awoke from the swoon.
And after she started up from her swoon,
Right in her hawk's language thus she said:
"That pity runs soon in a gentle heart,
Feeling its counterpart in sharp pains,
Is proven every day, as men may it see,
As well by deeds as by written authority;
For a gentle heart makes known its noble character.
I see well that you have of my distress
Compassion, my faire Canacee,
Out of true womanly goodness
That Nature in your natural disposition has set.
But for no hope to fare the better,
But to obey unto your heart noble,
And to make others be warned by my example,
As by the whelp chastised is the lion,
Right for that cause and to that conclusion,
While that I have the time and the opportunity,
My harm I will reveal ere I go away."
And ever, while that one her sorrow told,
That other wept as she would turn to water
Until the falcon prayed her to be still,
And, with a sigh, right thus she spoke her mind:
"Where I was bred -- alas, that same day! --
And fostered on a cliff of marble gray
So tenderly that no thing ailed me,
I knew not what was adversity
Until I could fly full high under the sky.
Then dwelt a male falcon very near me,
That seemed an exemplar of all nobility;
Although he was full of treason and falseness,
It was so concealed under humble bearing,
And under the appearance of truth in such a manner,
Under pleasantness, and under careful attentiveness,
That no creature could have supposed he could feign,
So deeply in a fast dye he dyed his true colors.
Just as a serpent hides himself under flowers
Until he can see his time to bite,
Just so this god of love's hypocrite
So does his ceremonies and obeisances,
And keeps in outward appearance all his observances
That are in accord with nobility in love.
As in a tomb all the beauty is above,
And under is the corpse, as you know,
Such was this hypocrite, in every circumstance.
And in this manner he served his own purpose
So that, except for the fiend, no one knew what he meant,
Until he so long had wept and complained,
And many a year his service to me feigned,
Until my heart, too compassionate and too naive,
Entirely ignorant of his consummate malice,
Very frightened that he might die, as it seemed to me,
Upon receiving his oaths and his pledges,
Granted him love, upon this condition,
That evermore my honor and renown
Were safe, both in private and in public (in all ways);
This is to say, that according to his deserts,
I gave him all my heart and all my thought --
God knows and he, I would not have agreed on any other terms --
And took his heart in exchange for mine for ever.
But truly it is said, since many a day gone by,
`An honest creature and a thief think not alike.'
And when he saw the business so far advanced
That I had granted him fully my love
In such a manner as I have said above,
And gave him my true heart as freely
As he swore he gave his heart to me,
Immediately
Fell on his knees with such devout humility,
With such high reverence, and, as seemed by his appearance,
So like a gentle lover in his manners,
So ravished, as it seemed, for the joy
That never Jason nor Paris of Troy --
Jason? certainly, nor any other man
Since Lameth was, he who first of all began
To love two, as folk wrote long ago --
Nor ever, since the first man was born,
Could (any) man, by (so much as) one twenty thousandth,
Reproduce the deceptive sophisms of his art,
Nor were worthy to unbuckle his galosh,
Where duplicity or feigning were concerned,
Nor so could thank a creature as he did to me!
His manner was a heaven to see
For any woman, were she never so wise,
So painted he and made himself elegant in every way,
Both his words and his countenance.
And I so loved him for his obeisance,
And for the truth I believed was in his heart,
That if it so were that any thing pained him,
Although it were never so little, and I knew of it,
It seemed to me I felt death twist my heart.
And shortly, this business had gone forth so far
That my will was his will's instrument;
This is to say, my will obeyed his will
In all things, so far as was consonant with reason,
Keeping ever the limits set by my honor.
Nor never loved anyone more, or even as much
As him, God knows, nor never shall again.
"This lasted longer than a year or two,
That I supposed of him nothing but good.
But finally, thus at the last it stood,
That Fortune would have it that he must depart
Out of that place where I was.
Whether I was woeful, there is no question;
I can not make a description of it.
For one thing I dare tell boldly:
By this experience I know what is the pain of death;
Such harm I felt because he could not remain.
So one day he took his leave of me,
So sorrowfully also that I believed truly
That he had felt as much harm as I,
When I heard him speak and saw his appearance.
But nevertheless, I thought he was so true,
And also that he should return again
Within a little while, to say the truth;
And it was reasonable also that he must go
For his honor, as often it happens so,
So that I made virtue of necessity,
And took it well, since it had to be.
As I best could, I hid from him my sorrow,
And took him by the hand, with Saint John as my guarantor,
And said to him thus: `Lo, I am all yours;
Be to me such as I to you have been and shall be.'
What he answered, it needs not be repeated;
Who can speak better than he, who can act worse?
When he has said everything well, then he has done (all he will do).
`Therefore she must have a very long spoon
Who shall eat with a fiend,' thus I have heard said.
So at the last he had to go forth on his way,
And forth he speeds until he came where he pleased.
When he decided to rest,
I believe he had that text in mind,
That `every thing, by returning to its natural state,
Makes himself happy;' thus say men, as I suppose.
Men, because of their nature, love novelty,
As do birds that men feed in cages.
For though thou take care of them night and day,
And strew their cages with straw fair and soft as silk,
And give them sugar, honey, bread and milk,
Yet just as soon as his door is left open
He with his feet will kick down his cup,
And to the wood he will go and eat worms;
They are so fond of novelty in their food,
And love novelties because of their nature,
No nobility of blood can restrain them.
"So fared this falcon, alas the day!
Though he was of noble birth, and fresh and gay,
And goodly to look upon and humble and generous,
He saw upon a time a kite (scavenger bird) fly by,
And suddenly he so loved this kite
That all his love is completely gone from me,
And has turned his truth false in this manner.
Thus has the kite my lover in her service,
And I am lost, without remedy!"
And with that word this falcon did cry out
And swooned again in Canacee's lap.
Great was the sorrow for the hawk's harm
That Canacee and all her women made;
They knew not how they might cheer up the falcon.
But Canacee carries her home enfolded in her gown,
And softly did wrap her in bandages,
Where she with her beak had hurt herself.
Now Canacee can do nothing but dig herbs
Out of the ground, and make new salves
Of herbs, precious and delicate in color,
With which to heal this hawk. From dawn to nighttime
She devotes her efforts and all her power,
And by her bed's head she made a pen
And covered it with velvet cloths, blue
As a sign of truth that is in women seen.
And on all the outside, the pen is painted green,
In which were painted all these false fowls,
Such as are these small birds, falcons, and owls;
For sheer scorn were painted beside them,
Magpies, to cry out against them and chide them.
Thus I leave Canacee keeping her hawk;
I will for now speak no more of her ring
Until it becomes again appropriate to tell
How this falcon got back her love,
Repentant, as the story tells us,
By the mediation of Cambalus,
The king's son, of whom I told you.
But henceforth I will keep to my narrative
To speak of adventures and of battles
That never yet were heard such great marvels.
First will I tell you of Cambyuskan,
That in his time many a city won;
And after I will speak of Algarsif,
How he won Theodora to his wife,
For whom full often in great peril he was,
Had he not been helped by the steed of brass;
And next I will speak of Cambalo,
That fought in lists with the brethren two
For Canacee ere he could win her.
And where I left off I will again begin.
Appollo whirls up his chariot so high
To that house of the god Mercury, the sly --
"In faith, Squire, thou hast well acquitted thyself.
And nobly. I praise well thy intelligence,"
Said the Franklin, "considering thy youth,
With such feeling thou speakest, sir, I praise thee!
In my opinion, there is no one that is here
That shall be thy equal in eloquence,
If thou live; God give thee good luck,
And in virtue send thee perseverance,
For I take great pleasure in thy speech.
I have a son, and by the Trinity,
I had rather than have twenty pound's worth of land,
Though it right now were fallen in my hand,
That he were a man of such discretion
As you are! Fie on possessions,
Unless a man is virtuous as well!
I have rebuked my son, and shall again,
Because he has no desire to devote himself to virtue;
But to play at dice, and to spend
And lose all that he has is his usage.
And he would rather talk with a serving boy
Than converse with any noble person
From whom he might learn true nobility."
"Straw for your nobility!" said our Host.
"What, Franklin! By God, sir, well thou knowest
That each of you must tell at the least
A tale or two, or break his promise."
"That know I well, sir," said the Franklin.
"I pray you, hold me not in disdain,
Though to this man I speak a word or two."
"Tell on thy tale without more words."
"Gladly, sir Host," said he, "I will obey
Unto your will; now hearken what I say.
I will not offend you in any way
So far as my mental abilities will suffice.
I pray to God that it may please you;
Then I will know well that it is good enough."
