This Summoner in his stirrups stood high;
Upon this Friar his heart was so enraged
That like an aspen leaf he quaked for ire.
"Gentlemen," said he, "but one thing I desire;
I you beseech that, of your courtesy,
Since you have heard this false Friar lie,
Now grant me that me I may tell my tale.
This Friar boasts that he knows hell,
And God knows it, that it is little wonder;
Friars and fiends are but little different.
For, by God, you have often times heard tell
How a friar was carried off to hell
In spirit once by a vision;
And as an angel led him up and down,
To show him the pains that were there,
In all the place saw he not a friar;
Of other folk he saw enough in woe.
Unto this angel spoke the friar then:
`Now, sir,' said he, `have friars such a grace
That none of them shall come to this place?'
`Yes' said this angel, `many a million!'
And unto Satan he led him down.
`And now has Satan,' says he, `a tail
Broader than of a large galleon is the sail.
Hold up thy tail, thou Satan!' said he;
`Show forth thy ass, and let the friar see
Where the nest of friars is in this place!'
And before half a furlong way of time (a few minutes),
Just as bees swarm out from a hive,
Out of the devil's ass there began to rush
Twenty thousand friars in a crowd,
And throughout hell swarmed all about,
And came back again as fast as they can go,
And in his ass they crept every one.
He clapped his tail again and lay very still.
This friar, when he had looked his fill
Upon the torments of this sorry place,
His spirit God restored, by his grace,
Unto his body again, and he awoke.
But nonetheless, for fear yet he quaked,
So was the devil's ass always in his mind,
That is his true natural heritage.
God save you all, except this cursed Friar!
My prologue will I end in this manner."
Gentlemen, there is in Yorkshire, as I believe,
A marshy country called Holdernesse,
In which there went a licensed beggar about
To preach, and also to beg, it is no doubt.
And so befell that on a day this friar
Had preached at a church in his manner,
And specially, above every thing,
Excited he the people in his preaching
To masses for dead souls, and to give, for God's sake,
The wherewithal that men might holy houses make,
Where divine service is honored,
Not where it is wasted and devoured,
Nor where it needs not to be given,
As to beneficed clergymen, that may live,
Thanked be God, in prosperity and abundance.
"Masses for souls," said he, "deliver from penance
Their friends' souls, as well old as young --
Yes, when they are hastily sung,
Not to keep a priest jolly and gay --
He sings not but one masse in a day.
Deliver out," said he, "immediately the souls!
Very hard it is with flesh hook or with awls
To be clawed, or to burn or bake.
Now speed you hastily, for Christ's sake!"
And when this friar had said all he intended,
With the prayer "who with the father" forth he went his way.
When folk in church had given him what they wished,
He went his way; no longer would he stay.
With satchel and metal-tipped staff, his robe tucked up high,
In every house he began to peer and pry,
And begs meal and cheese, or else grain.
His fellow had a staff tipped with horn,
A pair of tablets all of ivory,
And a writing instrument polished carefully,
And wrote the names always, as he stood,
Of all folk that gave him any good thing,
As if he would for them pray.
"Give us a bushel of wheat, malt, or rye,
A little cake, or a bit of cheese,
Or else what you like, we may not choose;
A God's halfpenny, or a mass penny,
Or give us some of your meat, if you have any;
A piece of your woolen cloth, dear lady,
Our sister dear -- lo! Here I write your name --
Bacon or beef, or such thing as you find."
A sturdy rascal went always behind them,
Who was their host's man, and bore a sack,
And what men gave them, laid it on his back.
And when he was out at door, immediately
He planed away the names every one
That he before had written in his tables;
He served them with tricks and with falsehoods.
"Nay, there thou lie, thou Summoner!" said the Friar.
"Quiet," said our Host, "for Christ's mother dear!
Tell forth thy tale, and spare it not at al."
"As I may thrive," said this Summoner, "so I shall!"
So long he went, house by house, until he
Came to a house where he was accustomed to be
Hospitably received more than in a hundred places.
Sick lay the good man whose the place is;
Bedridden upon a couch low he lay.
"God be here!" said he, "Oh Thomas, friend, good day!"
Said this friar, courteously and soft.
"Thomas," said he, "God reward you! Very often
Have I upon this bench fared full well;
Here have I eaten many a merry meal."
And from the bench he drove away the cat,
And laid down his walking stick and his hat,
And also his satchel, and set him softly down.
His fellow had gone walking into town
Forth with his knave, into that hostelry
Where he intended that night to lie.
"Oh dear master," said this sick man,
"How have you fared since March began?
I saw you not this fortnight or more."
"God knows," said he, "labored I have very hard,
And especially for thy salvation
Have I said many a precious prayer,
And for our other friends, God them bless!
I have today been at your church at mass,
And said a sermon insofar as my simple wit allowed --
Not entirely according to the text of holy writ,
For it is hard for you, as I suppose,
And therefore will I teach you all the interpretation.
Interpreting scripture is a glorious thing, certainly,
For letter slays, so we clerks say --
There have I taught them to be charitable,
And spend their goods where it is reasonable;
And there I saw our lady -- Ah! Where is she?"
"Yonder in the yard I believe that she be,"
Said this man, "and she will come anon."
"Ey, master, welcome are you, by Saint John!"
Said this wife, "How fare you, cordially (I ask)?"
The friar arises up full courteously,
And her embraces in his arms tightly,
And kissed her sweetly, and chirps like a sparrow
With his lips: "Lady," said he, "right well,
As he who is your servant every bit,
Thanked be God, who gave you soul and life!
Yet saw I not this day so fair a wife
In all the church, as God may save me!"
"Yes, God correct my faults, sir," said she.
"At any rate, welcome are you, by my faith!"
"Great thanks, lady, this have I found always.
But of your great goodness, by your leave,
I would pray you that you be not annoyed,
I will with Thomas speak a little while.
These curates are very negligent and slow
To examine gently a conscience
In confession; in preaching is my diligence,
And study in Peter's words and in Paul's.
I walk and fish Christian men's souls
To pay Jesus Christ his proper income;
To spread his word is set all my intention."
"Now, by your leave, oh dear sir," said she,
"Chide him well, for the Holy Trinity!
He is as angry as a pismire,
Though he have all that he can desire;
Though I cover him at night and make him warm,
And over him lay my leg or my arm,
He groans like our boor, that lies in our sty.
Other pleasure right none of him have I;
I can not please him in any sort of way."
"Oh Thomas, I tell you, Thomas! Thomas!
This makes the fiend; this must be amended.
Ire is a thing that high God forbad,
And thereof will I speak a word or two."
"Now, master," said the wife, "before I go,
What will you dine? I will go work on that."
"Now, lady," said he, "now I tell you without doubt
Have I of a capon only the liver,
And of your soft breed nothing but a sliver,
And after that a roasted pig's head --
But that I would that no beast for me were dead --
Then had I with you enough plain food.
I am a man who needs little sustenance;
My spirit has its nourishment in the Bible.
The body is always so ready and accustomed
To staying awake (to pray), that my stomach is destroyed.
I pray you, lady, that you be not annoyed,
Though I so friendly show you my private affairs.
By God! I would not tell it but to a few."
"Now, sir," said she, "but one word before I go.
My child is dead within these weeks two,
Soon after you went out of this town."
"His death saw I by revelation,"
Said this friar, "at home in our dormitory.
I dare well say that, before half an hour
After his death, I saw him carried up to bliss
In my vision, as God may guide me!
So did our sacristan and the head of our infirmary,
That have been true friars fifty years;
They may now -- God be thanked of his grace! --
Make their fiftieth anniversary and walk alone.
And up I rose, and all our convent as well,
With many a tear tricking on my cheek,
Without noise or clattering of bells;
Te Deum was our song, and nothing else,
Except that to Christ I said a prayer,
Thanking him for his revelation.
For, sir and lady, trust me right well,
Our prayers are more effectual,
And more we see of Christ's secret things,
Than secular folk, although they were kings.
We live in poverty and in abstinence,
And secular folk in riches and expenditures
Of food and drink, and in their foul delight.
We hold this world's lust all in scorn.
Lazar and Dives lived diversely,
And diverse rewards had they thereby.
Whoever will pray, he must fast and be pure,
And fatten his soul, and make his body lean.
We fare as says the apostle; cloth and food
Suffice us, though they are not full good.
The purity and the fasting of us friars
Makes that Christ accepts our prayers.
"Lo, Moses forty days and forty nights
Fasted, before the high God of might
Spoke with him in the mountain of Sinai.
With empty belly, fasting many a day,
Received he the law that was written
With God's finger; and Elijah, you know well,
In mount Horeb, before he had any speech
With high God, who is our life's physician,
He fasted long and was in meditation.
"Aaron, who had the temple in governance,
And also the other priests every one,
Into the temple when they should go
To pray for the people and do service,
They would not drink in any sort of way
Any drink which might make them drunk,
But there in abstinence pray and keep vigil,
Lest they died. Take heed what I say!
Unless they are sober who for the people pray,
Beware that -- I say no more, for it suffices.
"Our Lord Jesus, as holy writ devises,
Gave us an example of fasting and prayers.
Therefore we mendicants, we innocent friars,
Are wedded to poverty and chastity,
To charity, humility, and abstinence,
To persecution for righteousness,
To weeping, charity, and purity.
And therefore may you see that our prayers --
I speak of us, we mendicants, we friars --
Are to the high God more acceptable
Than yours, with your feasts at the table.
From Paradise first, if I shall not lie,
Was man chased out for his gluttony;
And chaste was man in Paradise, certainly.
"But hearken now, Thomas, what I shall say.
I have no text for it, as I suppose,
But I shall find it in some sort of gloss (interpretation),
That especially our sweet Lord Jesus
Spoke this about friars, when he said thus:
`Blessed are they who are poor in spirit.'
And so forth all the gospel may you see,
Whether it is more like our profession,
Or theirs who swim in possessions.
Fie on their pomp and on their gluttony!
And for their ignorance I scorn them.
"I think they are like Jovinian,
Fat as a whale, and waddling like a swan,
As full of wine as a bottle in the pantry.
Their prayer is of full great reverence,
When they for souls say the psalm of David:
Lo, `buf!' they say (belch), `my heart has uttered' (a good word)!
Who follows Christ's gospel and his path,
But we who are humble, and chaste, and poor,
Workers of God's word, not mere listeners?
Therefore, just as a hawk upon an upward flight
Up springs into the' air, right so prayers
Of charitable and chaste busy friars
Make their upward flight to God's two ears.
Thomas, Thomas! As I may ride or walk,
And by that lord who is called Saint Yve,
Were thou not our brother, thou shouldest not thrive.
In our assembly we pray day and night
To Christ, that he send thee health and strength
Thy body to move with ease hastily."
"God knows," said he, "no thing thereof feel I!
So help me Christ, I in few years,
Have spent upon different sorts of friars
Very many a pound; yet fare I never the better.
Certainly, I have almost spent all my goods.
Farewell, my gold, for it is all gone!"
The friar answered, "Oh Thomas, dost thou so?
Why do you need to seek various friars?
Why does one who has a perfect physician need
To seek other physicians in the town?
Your inconstancy is your ruin.
Consider you then me, or else our convent,
To be insufficient to pray for you?
Thomas, that trick is not worth a half a farthing.
Your malady is because we have too little.
Ah, give that convent half a quarter (four bushels) oats!
A, give that convent four and twenty groats (four pences)!
A, give that friar a penny, and let him go!
Nay, nay, Thomas, it may in no way be so!
What is a farthing worth divided into twelve?
Lo, each thing that is united in itself
Is more strong than when it is all scattered.
Thomas, by me thou shalt not be flattered;
Thou wouldest have our labor all for nothing.
The high God, who all this world has wrought,
Says that the workman is worthy of his hire.
Thomas, I do not desire any of your treasure
For myself, but because all our convent
To pray for you is always so diligent,
And to build Christ's own church.
Thomas, if you want to learn what to do,
Concerning building up of churches you can find
If it be good in the life of Thomas of India.
You lie here full of anger and of ire,
With which the devil set your heart afire,
And chide here the poor innocent,
Your wife, who is so meek and patient.
And therefore, Thomas, believe me if thou wish,
Strive not with thy wife, for thine own good;
And bear this word away now, by thy faith;
Concerning such thing, lo, what the wise man says:
`Within thy house be thou no lion;
To thy subjects do no oppression,
Nor make thy acquaintances to flee.'
And, Thomas, yet again I command thee,
Beware of Ire that in thy bosom sleeps;
Beware of the serpent that so slyly creeps
Under the grass and stings subtly.
Beware, my son, and hearken patiently
That twenty thousand men have lost their lives
For striving with their sweethearts and their wives.
Now since you have so holy meek a wife,
Why do you need, Thomas, to make strife?
There is, indeed, no serpent so cruel,
When man treads on his tail, nor half so fierce,
As woman is, when she has become angry;
Vengeance is then all that they desire.
Ire is a sin, one of the greatest of seven,
Abominable unto the God of heaven;
And to himself it is destruction.
This every ignorant vicar or parson
Can say, how ire engenders homicide.
Ire is, in truth, executor of pride.
I could of ire say so much sorrow,
My tale should last until to-morrow.
And therefore pray I God both day and night
An angry man, God send him little power!
It is great harm and certainly great pity
To set an angry man in high position.
"Once there was an angry potentate,
As says Seneca, who, during his reign,
Upon a day out rode two knights,
And as Fortune would that it were so,
That one of them came home, that other did not.
At once the knight is brought before the judge,
Who said thus, `Thou hast thy fellow slain,
For which I condemn thee to the death, certainly.'
And to another knight commanded he,
`Go lead him to the death, I charge thee.'
And it happened, as they went by the way
Toward the place where he should die,
The knight came who men believed had been dead.
Then thought they it would be the best plan
To lead them both to the judge again.
They said, `Lord, the knight has not slain
His fellow; here he stands whole and alive.'
`You shall be dead,' said he, `as I may thrive!
That is to say, both one, and two, and three!'
And to the first knight right thus spoke he,
`I condemned thee; thou must therefore be dead.
And thou also must of necessity lose thy head,
For thou art the cause why thy fellow dies.'
And to the third knight right thus he says,
`Thou hast not done what I commanded thee.'
And thus he caused them all three to be slain.
"Angry Cambises was also a drunkard,
And it always delighted him to be a scoundrel.
And as it happened, a lord of his household
Who loved virtuous morality
Said on a day betwixt them two right thus:
"`A lord is lost, if he be vicious;
And drunkenness is also a foul reputation
Of any man, and especially in a lord.
There is full many an eye and many an ear
Watching a lord, and he knows not where.
For God's love, drink more temperately!
Wine makes man to lose wretchedly
His mind and also his limbs every one.'
"`The reverse shalt thou see,' said he, `right now,
And prove it by thy own experience,
That wine does to folk no such offence.
There is no wine that deprives me of my power
Of hand nor foot, nor of my eyesight.'
And for spite he drank very much more,
By a hundred times, than he had done before;
And right away this angry, cursed wretch
Had this knight's son fetched before him,
Commanding him he should before him stand.
And suddenly he took his bow in hand,
And up the string he pulled to his ear,
And with an arrow he slew the child right there.
`Now tell me whether I have a sure hand or not?'
Said he; `Is all my power and mind gone?
Has wine bereft me of my eyesight?'
Why should I tell the answer of the knight?
His son was slain; there is no more to say.
Beware, therefore, how you act with lords.
Sing 'I shall please' and `I shall, if I can,'
Unless it be unto a poor man.
To a poor man one should tell his vices,
But not to a lord, though he should go to hell.
"Lo angry Cyrus, that Persian,
How he destroyed the river of Gysen,
Because a horse of his was drowned therein,
When he went to conquer Babylon.
He made it that the river was so small
That women could wade it everywhere.
Lo, what said he who so well can teach?
`Be no fellow to an angry man,
Nor with no enraged man walk by the way,
Lest thee repent;' I will no further say.
"Now, Thomas, dear brother, leave thine ire;
Thou shalt me find as true as is a carpenter's square.
Hold not the devil's knife always at thy heart --
Thine anger causes thee all too sorely to suffer --
But show to me all thy confession."
"Nay," said the sick man, "by Saint Symoun!
I have been shriven this day by my curate.
I have him told completely all my condition;
It needs no more to speak of it," says he,
"Unless I so wish, out of my humility."
"Give me then of thy gold, to make our cloister,"
Said he, "for many a mussel and many an oyster,
When other men have been full well at ease,
Have been our food, our cloister to erect.
And yet, God knows, hardly the foundation
Is finished, nor of our pavement
There is not a tile yet within our dwelling.
By God, we owe forty pounds for stones.
"Now help, Thomas, for him who despoiled hell of its captives!
For otherwise we must sell our books.
And if you lack our preaching,
Then all the world goes to destruction.
For whoever would rob us from this world,
So save me God, Thomas, by your leave,
He would take the sun out of this world.
For who can teach and work as we know how?
And that is not of recent times," said he,
"But since Elijah was, or Elisha,
Have friars been -- that I find in the records --
In charity, thanked be our Lord!
Now Thomas, help, for holy charity!"
And down at once he set himself on his knee.
This sick man grew well nigh mad for ire;
He wished that the friar had been afire
With his false dissimulation.
"Such a thing as is in my possession,"
Said he, "that can I give, and none other.
You say me thus, that I am your brother?"
"Yes, certainly," said the friar, "trust well.
I gave our lady our letter with our seal."
"Well now," said he, "and something shall I give
Unto your holy convent while I live;
And in thy hand thou shalt it have right now,
On this condition, and none other,
That thou divide it so, my dear brother,
That every friar have as much as the other.
This shalt thou swear on thy religious vows,
Without fraud or quibbling."
"I swear it," said this friar, "by my faith!"
And therewith his hand in his he lays,
"Lo, have here my faith; I shall not fail (to keep my word)."
"Now then, put in thy hand down by my back,"
Said this man, "and grope well behind.
Beneath my buttock where shalt thou find
A thing that I have hidden in private."
"Ah!" thought this friar, "That shall go with me!"
And down his hand he thrusts to the cleft
In hope to find there a gift.
And when this sick man felt this friar
About his anus grope there and here,
Amid his hand he let the friar a fart;
There is no horse, pulling a cart,
That could have let a fart of such a sound.
The friar up started as does a mad lion --
"Ah, false churl," said he, "for God's bones!
This hast thou done on purpose for spite.
Thou shalt pay for this fart, if I can (do so)!"
His servants, who heard this affray,
Came leaping in and chased out the friar;
And forth he goes, with a very angry look,
And fetched his fellow, where lay his store.
He looked like a wild boar;
He gnashed his teeth, he was so angry.
At a rapid pace down to the court he goes,
Where there dwelt a man of greet honor,
To whom he was always confessor.
This worthy man was lord of that village.
This friar came as if he were in a rage,
Where the lord sat eating at his table;
Hardly could the friar speak a word,
Until at the last he said, "God you see!"
This lord did look, and said, "Bless me!
What, friar John, what sort of carrying on is this?
I see well that there is something amiss;
You look as if the wood were full of thieves.
Sit down right now, and tell me what your grief is,
And it shall be amended, if I can."
"I have," said he, "had an insult this day,
God reward you, down in your village,
That in this world is none so poor a servant boy
That he would not be nauseated
By what I have received in your town.
And yet there grieves me nothing so sore,
As that this old churl with white locks
Blasphemed has our holy convent as well."
"Now, master," said this lord, "I you beseech --"
"No master, sir," said he, "but servant,
Though I have had in school that honor.
God likes not that `Rabbi' men us call,
Neither in market nor in your large hall."
"No matter," said he, "but tell me all your grief."
"Sir," said this friar, "an odious mischief
This day has happened to my order and me,
And so, consequently, to each degree
Of holy church -- God amend it soon!"
"Sir," said the lord, "you know what is to be done.
Do not be angry; you are my confessor;
You are the salt of the earth and the delight.
For God's love, keep your patience!
Tell me your grief." And he straightway told him,
As you have heard before -- you know well what.
The lady of the house always still sat
Until she had heard what the friar said.
"Ey, God's mother," said she, "Blissful maid!
Is there anything else? Tell me faithfully."
"My lady," said he, "how think you of this?"
"How I think" said she. "So help me God,
I say a churl has done a churl's deed.
What should I say? God let him never prosper!
His sick head is full of foolishness;
I consider him in a sort of delirium."
"My lady," said he, "by God, I shall not lie,
Unless I can be avenged in another manner,
I shall defame him wherever I speak,
This false blasphemer who charged me
To divide that which will not be divided
Equally to every man, with bad luck (to him)!"
The lord sat still as if he were in a trance,
And in his heart he rolled up and down,
"How had this churl imagination
To show such a problem to the friar?
Never previously before now heard I of such a matter.
I believe the devil put it in his mind.
In the art of measuring (arithmetic) shall there no man find,
Before this day, such a problem.
Who should make a logical proof
That every man should have equally his part
As of the sound or odor of a fart?
Oh ingenious, proud churl, I curse his face!
Lo, sirs," said the lord, "with bad luck (to him)!
Who ever heard of such a thing before now?
To every man equally? Tell me how.
It is an impossibility; it can not be.
Ey, clever churl, God let him never prosper!
The rumbling of a fart, and every sound,
Is nothing but reverberation of air,
And ever it wastes away little by little.
There is no man can judge, by my faith,
If it were divided equally.
What, lo, my churl, lo, yet how shrewdly
Unto my confessor to-day he spoke!
I consider him certainly one possessed by a demon!
Now eat your food, and let the churl go play;
Let him go hang himself in the devil's name!"
Now stood the lord's squire at the board,
Who carved his meat, and heard word by word
Of all the things which I have told you.
"My lord," said he, "if you be not displeased,
I could tell, for a cloth to make a gown,
To you, sir friar, providing you be not angry,
How this fart should evenly be divided
Among your convent, if it pleased me."
"Tell," said the lord, "and thou shalt have straightway
A gown-cloth, by God and by Saint John!"
"My lord," said he, "when the weather is fair,
Without wind or disturbance of air,
Let a cartwheel be brought here into this hall;
But see that it has all its spokes --
Twelve spokes has a cartwheel commonly.
And bring me then twelve friars. Know you why?
For thirteen is a convent, as I believe.
Your confessor here, for his worthiness,
Shall complete the number of his convent.
Then shall they kneel down, all together,
And to every spoke's end, in this manner,
A friar shall very firmly lay his nose.
Your noble confessor -- may God him save! --
Shall hold his nose upright under the nave.
Then shall this churl, with belly stiff and taut
As any drum, hither be brought;
And set him right on the wheel of this cart,
Upon the nave, and make him let a fart.
And you shall see, on peril of my life (I swear),
By proof which is logical,
That equally the sound of it will go,
And also the stink, unto the spokes' ends,
Except that this worthy man, your confessor,
Because he is a man of greet honor,
Shall have the first fruit, as is reasonable.
The noble usage of friars yet is this,
The worthy men of them shall first be served;
And certainly he has it well deserved.
He has to-day taught us so much good
With preaching in the pulpit where he stood,
That I can affirm, I say for me,
He had the first smell of three farts;
And so would all his convent certainly (agree),
He bears him so faire and holily."
The lord, the lady, and each man, except the friar,
Said that Jankyn spoke, in this matter,
As well as Euclid or Ptolemy.
Concerning the churl, they said, shrewdness
And great intelligence made him speak as he spoke;
He is no fool, nor possessed by any demon.
And Jankyn has won a new gown --
My tale is done; we are almost at town.
