"Experience, though no written authority
Were in this world, is good enough for me
To speak of the woe that is in marriage;
For, gentlemen, since I was twelve years of age,
Thanked be God who is eternally alive,
I have had five husbands at the church door --
If I so often might have been wedded --
And all were worthy men in their way.
But to me it was told, certainly, it is not long ago,
That since Christ went never but once
To a wedding, in the Cana of Galilee,
That by that same example he taught me
That I should be wedded but once.
Listen also, lo, what a sharp word for this purpose,
Beside a well, Jesus, God and man,
Spoke in reproof of the Samaritan:
`Thou hast had five husbands,' he said,
`And that same man that now has thee
Is not thy husband,' thus he said certainly.
What he meant by this, I can not say;
But I ask, why the fifth man
Was no husband to the Samaritan?
How many might she have in marriage?
I never yet heard tell in my lifetime
A definition of this number.
Men may conjecture and interpret in every way,
But well I know, expressly, without lie,
God commanded us to grow fruitful and multiply;
That gentle text I can well understand.
Also I know well, he said my husband
Should leave father and mother and take to me.
But he made no mention of number,
Of marrying two, or of marrying eight;
Why should men then speak evil of it?
Lo, (consider) here the wise king, dan Salomon;
I believe he had wives more than one.
As would God it were lawful unto me
To be refreshed half so often as he!
What a gift of God he had because of all his wives!
No man that in this world is alive has such (a gift).
God knows, this noble king, according to my judgment,
The first night had many a merry fit
With each of them, so well things went for him in his lifetime.
Blessed be God that I have wedded five!
[Of which I have picked out the best,
Both of their lower purse (scrotum) and of their strongbox.
Differing schools make perfect clerks,
And differing practice in many various works
Makes the workman truly perfect;
Of five husbands' schooling am I.]
Welcome the sixth, whenever he shall appear.
For truly, I will not keep myself chaste in everything.
When my husband is gone from the world,
Some Christian man shall wed me straightway,
For then the apostle says that I am free
To wed, by God's side (I swear), wherever it pleases me.
He says that to be wedded is no sin;
It is better to be wedded than to burn.
What do I care, though folk speak evil
Of cursed Lamech and his bigamy?
I know well Abraham was a holy man,
And Jacob also, insofar as I know;
And each of them had more than two wives,
And many another holy man also.
Where can you find, in any historical period,
That high God forbad marriage
By express word? I pray you, tell me.
Or where commanded he virginity?
I know as well as you, it is no doubt,
The apostle, when he speaks of maidenhood,
He said that he had no precept concerning it.
Men may advise a woman to be one,
But advice is no commandment.
He left it to our own judgment;
For had God commanded maidenhood,
Then had he damned marriage along with the act (of procreation).
And certainly, if there were no seed sown,
Then from what should virginity grow?
In any case, Paul dared not command
A thing of which his master gave no command.
The prize is set up for virginity;
Catch it whoever can, let's see who runs best.
But this word does not apply to every person,
But where God desires to give it by his power.
I know well that the apostle was a virgin;
But nonetheless, though he wrote and said
He would that every person were such as he,
All is nothing but advice to (adopt) virginity. 
And he gave me leave to be a wife 
By explicit permission; so it is not blameful
To wed me, if my mate should die,
Without objection on the grounds of bigamy.
Although it would be good to touch no woman --
He meant in his bed or in his couch,
For it is perilous to assemble both fire and flax;
You know what this example may apply to.
This is the sum of it: he held virginity
More perfect than wedding in weakness.
Weakness I call it, unless he and she
Would lead all their life in chastity.
I grant it well; I have no envy,
Though maidenhood may have precedence over a second marriage.
It pleases them to be clean, body and spirit;
Of my state I will make no boast,
For well you know, a lord in his household,
He has not every utensil all of gold;
Some are of wood, and do their lord service.
God calls folk to him in various ways,
And each one has of God an individual gift --
Some this, some that, as it pleases Him to provide.
Virginity is great perfection,
And continence also with devotion,
But Christ, who is the source of perfection,
Did not command that every one should go sell
All that he had, and give it to the poor,
And in such wise follow him and his footsteps.
He spoke to those who would live perfectly;
And gentlemen, by your leave, I am not that.
I will bestow the flower of all my age
In the acts and in fruit of marriage.
Tell me also, to what purpose
Were members of generation made,
And by so perfectly wise a Workman wrought?
Trust right well, they were not made for nothing.
Interpret whoever will, and say both up and down
That they were made for purgation
Of urine, and both our small things 
Were also to know a female from a male,
And for no other cause -- do you say no?
The experience knows well it is not so.
Provided that the clerks be not angry with me,
I say this: that they are made for both;
That is to say, for urination and for ease
Of procreation, in which we do not displease God.
Why else should men set in their books 
That man shall pay to his wife her debt?
Now with what should he make his payment,
If he did not use his blessed instrument? 
Then were they made upon a creature
To purge urine, and also for procreation.
But I say not that every person is required,
That has such equipment as I to you told,
To go and use them in procreation.
Then should men have no regard for chastity.
Christ was a virgin and shaped like a man,
And many a saint, since the world began;
Yet lived they ever in perfect chastity.
I will envy no virginity.
Let them be bread of pure wheat-seed,
And let us wives be called barley-bread;
And yet with barley-bread, Mark can tell it,
Our Lord Jesus refreshed many a man.
In such estate as God has called us
I will persevere; I am not fussy.
In wifehood I will use my instrument
As freely as my Maker has it sent.
If I be niggardly, God give me sorrow!
My husband shall have it both evenings and mornings,
When it pleases him to come forth and pay his debt.
A husband I will have -- I will not desist --
Who shall be both my debtor and my slave,
And have his suffering also 
Upon his flesh, while I am his wife.
I have the power during all my life
Over his own body, and not he.
Right thus the Apostle told it unto me,
And commanded our husbands to love us well.
All this sentence pleases me every bit" --
Up sprang the Pardoner, and that at once;
"Now, madam," he said, "by God and by Saint John!
You are a noble preacher in this case.
I was about to wed a wife; alas!
Why should I pay for it so dearly on my flesh?
Yet would I rather wed no wife this year!"
"Wait!" she said, "my tale is not begun.
Nay, thou shalt drink from another barrel,
Before I go, which shall taste worse than ale.
And when I have told thee forth my tale
Of suffering in marriage, 
Of which I am expert in all my life -- 
This is to say, myself have been the whip --
Than may thou choose whether thou will sip
Of that same barrel that I shall open.
Beware of it, before thou too near approach;
For I shall tell examples more than ten.
`Whoever will not be warned by (the examples of) other men,
Shall be an example by which other men shall be corrected.'
The same words writes Ptholomy;
Read in his Almagest, and take it there."
"Madam, I would pray you, if it were your will,"
Said this Pardoner, "as you began,
Tell forth your tale, refrain for no man,
And teach us young men of your practice."
"Gladly," she said, "since it may please you;
But yet I pray to all this company,
If I speak according to my fancy,
Do not be annoyed by what I say,
For my intention is only to amuse.
Now, sir, now will I tell forth my tale.
As ever may I drink wine or ale,
I shall speak the truth; those husbands that I had,
Three of them were good, and two were bad.
The three were good men, and rich, and old;
Hardly might they the statute hold (pay the debt)
In which they were bound unto me.
You know well what I mean of this, by God!
So help me God, I laugh when I think
How pitifully at night I made them work!
And, by my faith, I set no store by it.
They had given me their land and their treasure;
I needed not work hard any longer
To win their love, or do them reverence.
They loved me so well, by God above,
That I reckoned little of their love!
A wise woman will be constantly busy
To get their love, yes, when she has none.
But since I had them wholly in my hand,
And since they had me given all their land,
Why should I take care to please them,
Unless it were for my profit and my pleasure?
I set them so to work, by my faith,
That many a night they sang `Woe is me!'
The bacon was not fetched for them, I believe,
That some men have in Essex at Dunmowe.
I governed them so well, according to my law,
That each of them was very blissful and eager
To bring me gay things from the fair.
They were very glad when I spoke to them pleasantly,
For, God knows it, I cruelly scolded them.
Now listen how well I conducted myself,
You wise wives, that can understand.
Thus should you speak and accuse them wrongfully,
For half so boldly can there no man
Swear and lie, as a woman can.
I do not say this concerning wives that are wise,
Unless it be when they are ill advised.
A wise wife, if she knows what is good for her,
Shall deceive him by swearing the bird is crazy, 
And prove it by taking witness of her own maid 
Who is in league with her. But listen how I spoke: 
`Sir old doddering fool, is this thy doing? 
Why is my neighbor's wife so gay?
She is honored everywhere she goes;
I sit at home; I have no decent clothing.
What dost thou at my neighbor's house?
Is she so fair? Art thou so amorous?
What do you whisper with our maid? Bless me!
Sir old lecher, let thy tricks be! 
And if I have a close friend or an acquaintance,
Innocently, thou scold like a fiend,
If I walk or go unto his house to amuse myself!
Thou comest home as drunk as a mouse,
And preach on thy bench, bad luck to you!
Thou sayest to me it is a great misfortune
To wed a poor woman, because of expense;
And if she be rich, of high birth,
Then thou sayest that it is a torment
To put up with her pride and her angry moods.
And if she be fair, thou utter knave,
Thou sayest that every lecher wants to have her;
She can not remain chaste for any length of time, 
Who is assailed on every side.
Thou sayest some folk desire us for riches,
Some for our shape, and some for our fairness,
And one because she can either sing or dance,
And some because of noble descent and flirtatious talk;
Some because of their hands and their slender arms;
Thus goes all to the devil, according to you.
Thou sayest men may not defend a castle wall,
It may so long be assailed on all sides.
And if she be ugly, thou sayest that she
Covets every man that she may see,
For like a spaniel she will on him leap,
Until she find some man to buy (take) her.
Nor does any goose go there in the lake, no matter how drab,
That, thou sayest, will be without a mate.
And thou sayest it is a hard thing to control
A thing that no man will, willingly, hold.
Thus sayest thou, scoundrel, when thou goest to bed,
And that no wise man needs to wed,
Nor any man that hopes (to go) to heaven.
With wild thunder-bolt and fiery lightning
May thy wrinkled neck be broken in pieces!
Thou sayest that leaky houses, and also smoke,
And scolding wives make men to flee
Out of their own houses; ah, bless me!
What ails such an old man to chide like that?
Thou sayest we wives will hide our vices 
Until we be securely tied (in marriage), and then we will them show --
Well may that be a proverb of a scoundrel!
Thou sayest that oxen, asses, horses, and hounds,
They are tried out a number of times;
Basins, wash bowls, before men them buy,
Spoons and stools, and all such household items,
And so are pots, clothes, and adornments;
But folk of wives make no trial,
Until they are wedded -- old doddering scoundrel! --
And then, sayest thou, we will show our vices.
Thou sayest also that it displeases me
Unless thou will praise my beauty,
And unless thou peer always upon my face,
And call me "dear lady" in every place.
And unless thou make a feast on that same day
That I was born, and make me happy and gay;
And unless thou do honor to my nurse,
And to my chambermaid within my bedchamber,
And to my father's folk and his allies --
Thus sayest thou, old barrelful of lies!
And yet of our apprentice Janekin,
Because of his curly hair, shining like gold so fine,
And because he familiarly attends me everywhere,
Yet hast thou caught a false suspicion.
I do not want him, though thou were dead tomorrow!
But tell me this: why hidest thou, bad luck to you,
The keys of thy strongbox away from me?
It is my property as well as thine, by God!
What, think thou to make a fool of the lady of the house?
Now by that lord that is called Saint James,
Thou shalt not both, though thou were crazy with anger,
Be master of my body and of my property;
One of them thou must give up, despite anything you can do.
What helps it to inquire about me or spy?
I believe thou would lock me in thy strongbox!
Thou should say, "Wife, go where you please;
Enjoy yourself; I will not believe any gossip.
I know you for a true wife, dame Alys."
We love no man who takes notice or concern about
Where we go; we will be free (to do as we wish).
Of all men blessed may he be,
The wise astrologer, Dan Ptolemy,
Who says this proverb in his Almagest:
"Of all men his wisdom is the highest
Who never cares who has the world in his control."
By this proverb thou shalt understand,
If thou have enough, why should thou take note or care
How merrily other folks fare?
For, certainly, old senile fool, by your leave,
You shall have pudendum right enough at eve. 
He is too great a miser that would refuse
A man to light a candle at his lantern;
He shall have never the less light, by God.
If thou have enough, thou need not complain.
Thou sayest also, that if we make ourselves gay
With clothing, and with precious adornments,
That it is dangerous to our chastity;
And yet -- bad luck to thee! -- thou must reinforce thy argument,
And say these words in the Apostle's name:
"In clothing made with chastity and shame
You women shall apparel yourselves," he said,
"And not in carefully arranged hair and gay precious stones,
Such as pearls, nor with gold, nor rich cloth."
In accordance with thy text, nor in accord with thy interpretation,
I will not do as much as a gnat.
Thou said this, that I was like a cat;
For if anyone would singe a cat's skin,
Then would the cat well stay in his dwelling;
And if the cat's skin be sleek and gay,
She will not stay in house half a day,
But forth she will (go), before any day be dawned,
To show her skin and go yowling like a cat in heat. 
This is to say, if I be well dressed, sir scoundrel,
I will run out to show my poor clothes.
Sir old fool, what help is it for thee to spy?
Though thou pray Argus with his hundred eyes
To be my bodyguard, as he best knows how,
In faith, he shall not keep me but as I please;
Yet could I deceive him, as I may prosper!
Thou said also that there are three things,
The which things trouble all this earth,
And that no one can endure the fourth.
O dear sir scoundrel, Jesus shorten thy life!
Yet thou preachest and sayest a hateful wife
Is reckoned as one of these misfortunes.
Are there no other sorts of comparisons
That you can use in your sayings, 
Without a poor wife's being one of them?
Thou also compare women's love to hell,
To barren land, where water may not remain.
Thou compare it also to Greek (inextinguishable) fire;
The more it burns, the more it has desire
To consume every thing that will be burned.
Thou sayest, just as worms destroy a tree,
Right so a wife destroys her husband;
This know they who are bound to wives.'
Gentlemen, right thus, as you have heard,
I firmly swore to my old husbands
That thus they said in their drunkenness;
And all was false, but I took witness
On Janekin, and on my niece also.
O Lord! The pain I did them and the woe,
Entirely guiltless (they were), by God's sweet pain!
For like a horse I could bite and whinny.
I could complain, and yet was in the wrong,
Or else many times had I been ruined.
Whoever first comes to the mill, first grinds;
I complained first, so was our war ended.
They were very glad to excuse themselves quickly
Of things of which they were never guilty in their lives.
Of wenches would I falsely accuse them,
When for sickness they could hardly stand.
Yet I tickled his heart, for he
Believed that I had of him so great affection!
I swore that all my walking out by night
Was to spy out wenches with whom he had intercourse;
Under that pretense I had many a mirth.
For all such wit is given us in our birth;
Deceit, weeping, spinning God has given
To women naturally, while they may live.
And thus of one thing I boast:
At the end I had the better in every way,
By trickery, or force, or by some such thing, 
As by continual grumbling or grouching.
Especially in bed they had misfortune:
There would I scold and do them no pleasure;
I would no longer in the bed abide,
If I felt his arm over my side,
Until he had paid his penalty to me;
Then would I allow him to do his foolishness.
And therefore this tale I tell to every man,
Anyone can profit, for everything is for sale; 
One can lure no hawks with an empty hand.
For profit I would endure all his lust,
And make me a feigned appetite;
And yet in bacon (old meat) I never had delight.
That made me so that I would always scold them,
For though the pope had sat beside them,
I would not spare them at their own table,
For, by my troth, I paid them back word for word.
As help me true God omnipotent,
Though I right now should make my will,
I owe them not one word that has not been avenged.
I brought it so about by my wit
That they had to give it up, as the best they could do,
Or else had we never been at peace;
For though he looked like a furious lion,
Yet should he fail to attain his goal.
Then I would say, `Sweetheart, see 
How meekly looks Willy, our sheep!
Come near, my spouse, let me kiss thy cheek!
You should be all patient and meek,
And have a sweet tender disposition,
Since you so preach of Job's patience.
Suffer always, since you so well can preach;
And unless you do, certainly we shall teach you 
That it is fair to have a wife in peace.
One of us two must bow, doubtless,
And since a man is more reasonable
Than a woman is, you must be able to bear suffering.
What ails you to grouch thus and groan?
Is it because you want to have my pudendum all to yourself?
Why, take it all! Lo, have it every bit!
By Saint Peter! I would curse you, if you did not love it well;
For if I would sell my `pretty thing,' 
I could walk as fresh (newly clothed) as is a rose;
But I will keep it for your own pleasure.
You are to blame, by God! I tell you the truth.'
Such sorts of words we had in hand. 
Now will I speak of my fourth husband.
My fourth husband was a reveller --
This is to say, he had a mistress --
And I was young and full of playfulness,
Stubborn and strong, and jolly as a magpie.
How well I could dance to a small harp,
And sing, indeed, like any nightingale,
When I had drunk a draft of sweet wine!
Metellius, the foul churl, the swine,
Who with a staff deprived his wife of her life,
Because she drank wine, if I had been his wife,
He should not have frightened me away from drink!
And after wine on Venus must I think,
For as surely as cold engenders hail,
A gluttonous mouth must have a lecherous tail.
In drunken women there is no defense --
This lechers know by experience.
But -- Lord Christ! -- when I remember
My youth, and my gaiety,
It tickles me to the bottom of my heart.
Unto this day it does my heart good
That I have had my world in my time.
But age, alas, that all will poison,
Has deprived me of my beauty and my vigor.
Let it go. Farewell! The devil go with it!
The flour is gone; there is no more to tell;
The bran, as I best can, now I must sell;
But yet I will try to be right merry.
Now will I tell of my fourth husband.
I say, I had in heart great anger
That he had delight in any other.
But he was paid back, by God and by Saint Joce!
I made him a cross of the same wood;
Not of my body, in no foul manner,
But certainly, I treated folk in such a way 
That I made him fry in his own grease 
For anger, and for pure jealousy.
By God, in earth I was his purgatory,
For which I hope his soul may be in glory.
For, God knows it, he sat very often and cried out in pain, 
When his shoe very bitterly pinched him.
There was no person who knew it, save God and he,
In many a way, how painfully I tortured him.
He died when I came from Jerusalem,
And lies buried under the rood beam, 
Although his tomb is not so elaborate
As was the sepulcher of that Darius,
Which Appelles wrought skillfully;
It is nothing but waste to bury him expensively.
Let him fare well; God give his soul rest!
He is now in his grave and in his casket.
Now of my fifth husband I will tell.
God let his soul never come in hell!
And yet he was to me the greatest scoundrel;
That feel I on my ribs one after another,
And ever shall unto my final day.
But in our bed he was so lively and gay,
And moreover he so well could deceive me,
When he would have my `pretty thing';
That though he had beat me on every bone,
He could win back my love straightway.
I believe I loved him best, because he
Was of his love standoffish to me. 
We women have, if I shall not lie,
In this matter a curious fantasy:
Note that whatever thing we may not easily have,
We will cry all day and crave for it.
Forbid us a thing, and we desire it;
Press on us fast, and then will we flee.
With niggardliness we spread out all our merchandise;
A great crowd at the market makes wares expensive,
And too great a supply makes them of little value: 
Every woman that is wise knows this.
My fifth husband -- God bless his soul! --
Whom I took for love, and no riches,
He was formerly a clerk of Oxford,
And had left school, and came home to board
With my close friend, dwelling in our town;
God have her soul! Her name was Alisoun.
She knew my heart, and also my secrets,
Better than our parish priest, as I may prosper!
To her I revealed all my secrets.
For had my husband pissed on a wall,
Or done a thing that should have cost his life,
To her, and to another worthy wife,
And to my niece, whom I loved well,
I would have told every one of his secrets.
And so I did very often, God knows it,
That made his face often red and hot
For true shame, and blamed himself because he
Had told to me so great a secret.
And so it happened that once in a Springtime --
Since frequently I went to visit my close friend, 
For I always loved to be gay,
And to walk in March, April, and May,
From house to house, to hear various bits of gossip --
That Jankin the clerk, and my close friend dame Alys,
And I myself, into the fields went.
My husband was at London all that Spring;
I had the better opportunity to amuse myself,
And to see, and also to be seen
By amorous folk. What did I know about where my good fortune 
Was destined to be, or in what place?
Therefore I made my visitations
To religious feasts and to processions, 
To preaching also, and to these pilgrimages,
To plays about miracles, and to marriages,
And wore my gay scarlet robes.
These worms, nor these moths, nor these mites,
Upon my peril (I swear), chewed on them never a bit;
And know thou why? Because they were well used.
Now will I tell forth what happened to me.
I say that in the fields we walked,
Until truly we had such flirtation,
This clerk and I, that for my provision for the future
I spoke to him and said to him how he,
If I were a widow, should wed me.
For certainly -- I say this for no boast --
I was never yet without providing beforehand 
For marriage, nor for other things also.
I hold a mouse's heart not worth a leek
That has but one hole to flee to,
If that should fail, then all is lost.
I falsely swore that he had enchanted me --
My mother taught me that trick --
And also I said I dreamed of him all night,
He would have slain me as I lay on my back,
And all my bed was full of real blood; 
`But yet I hope that you shall do me good,
For blood symbolizes gold, as I was taught.'
And all was false; I dreamed of it not at all, 
But I followed always my mother's teaching,
As well in this as in other things more.
But now, sir, let me see what I shall say.
A ha! By God, I have my tale again.
When my fourth husband was on the funeral bier,
I wept continuously, and acted sorry,
As wives must do, for it is the custom,
And with my kerchief covered my face,
But because I was provided with a mate,
I wept but little, and that I affirm.
To church was my husband carried in the morning
By neighbors, who for him made sorrow;
And Jankin, our clerk, was one of those.
As help me God, when I saw him go
After the bier, I thought he had a pair
Of legs and of feet so neat and fair
That all my heart I gave unto his keeping.
He was, I believe, twenty years old,
And I was forty, if I shall tell the truth;
But yet I had always a colt's tooth.
With teeth set wide apart I was, and that became me well;
I had the print of Saint Venus's seal.
As help me God, I was a lusty one,
And fair, and rich, and young, and well fixed,
And truly, as my husbands told me,
I had the best pudendum that might be. 
For certainly, I am all influenced by Venus
In feeling, and my heart is influenced by Mars.
Venus me gave my lust, my amorousness,
And Mars gave me my sturdy boldness;
My ascendant was Taurus, and Mars was therein.
Alas, alas! That ever love was sin!
I followed always my inclination
By virtue of the state of the heavens at my birth;
That made me that I could not withdraw
My chamber of Venus from a good fellow.
Yet have I Mars' mark upon my face,
And also in another private place.
For as God may be my salvation,
I never loved in moderation,
But always followed my appetite,
Whether he were short, or tall, or black-haired, or blond;
I took no notice, provided that he pleased me,
How poor he was, nor also of what rank.
What should I say but, at the month's end,
This jolly clerk, Jankin, that was so courteous,
Has wedded me with great solemnity,
And to him I gave all the land and property
That ever was given to me before then.
But afterward I repented very bitterly;
He would not allow me anything of my desires.
By God, he hit me once on the ear,
Because I tore a leaf out of his book,
So that of the stroke my ear became all deaf.
I was as stubborn as is a lioness,
And of my tongue a true chatterbox,
And I would walk, as I had done before,
From house to house, although he had sworn the contrary;
For which he often times would preach,
And teach me of old Roman stories;
How he, Simplicius Gallus, left his wife,
And forsook her for rest of all his life,
Because of nothing but because he saw her bare-headed
Looking out at his door one day.
Another Roman he told me by name,
Who, because his wife was at a midsummer revel
Without his knowledge, he forsook her also.
And then he would seek in his Bible
That same proverb of Ecclesiasticus
Where he commands and strictly forbids that
Man should suffer his wife go wander about.
Then would he say right thus, without doubt:
`Whoever builds his house all of willow twigs,
And spurs his blind horse over the open fields,
And suffers his wife to go on pilgrimages,
Is worthy to be hanged on the gallows!'
But all for nothing, I gave not a hawthorn berry 
For his proverbs nor for his old sayings,
Nor would I be corrected by him.
I hate him who tells me my vices,
And so do more of us, God knows, than I.
This made him all utterly furious with me;
I would not put up with him in any way.
Now will I tell you the truth, by Saint Thomas,
Why I tore a leaf out of his book,
For which he hit me so hard that I was deaf.
He had a book that regularly, night and day,
For his amusement he would always read;
He called it Valerie and Theofrastus,
At which book he always heartily laughed.
And also there was once a clerk at Rome,
A cardinal, who is called Saint Jerome,
That made a book against Jovinian;
In which book also there was Tertullian,
Crisippus, Trotula, and Heloise,
Who was abbess not far from Paris,
And also the Parables of Salomon,
Ovid's Art, and many other books,
And all these were bound in one volume.
And every night and day was his custom,
When he had leisure and spare time
From other worldly occupations,
To read in this book of wicked wives.
He knew of them more legends and lives
Than are of good women in the Bible.
For trust well, it is an impossibility
That any clerk will speak good of women,
Unless it be of holy saints' lives,
Nor of any other woman in any way.
Who painted the lion, tell me who?
By God, if women had written stories,
As clerks have within their studies, 
They would have written of men more wickedness
Than all the male sex could set right.
The children of Mercury (clerks) and of Venus (lovers)
Are directly contrary in their actions;
Mercury loves wisdom and knowledge,
And Venus loves riot and extravagant expenditures.
And, because of their diverse dispositions,
Each falls in the other's most powerful astronomical sign.
And thus, God knows, Mercury is powerless
In Pisces (the Fish), where Venus is exalted,
And Venus falls where Mercury is raised.
Therefore no woman is praised by any clerk.
The clerk, when he is old, and can not do
Any of Venus's works worth his old shoe,
Then he sits down, and writes in his dotage
That women can not keep their marriage!
But now to the point, why I told thee
That I was beaten for a book, by God!
Upon a night Jankin, that was master of our house,
Read on his book, as he sat by the fire,
Of Eve first, how for her wickedness
All mankind was brought to wretchedness,
For which Jesus Christ himself was slain,
Who bought us back with his heart's blood.
Lo, here clearly of woman you may find
That woman was the cause of the loss of all mankind.
Then he read me how Sampson lost his hair:
Sleeping, his lover cut it with her shears; 
Through which treason he lost both his eyes.
Then he read to me, if I shall not lie,
Of Hercules and of his Dianyre,
Who caused him to set himself on fire.
He forgot not a bit of the care and the woe
That Socrates had with his two wives,
How Xantippa caste piss upon his head.
This poor man sat still as if he were dead; 
He wiped his head, no more dared he say,
But `Before thunder stops, there comes a rain!'
Of Phasipha, that was the queen of Crete,
For sheer malignancy, he thought the tale sweet;
Fie! Speak no more -- it is a grisly thing --
Of her horrible lust and her pleasure.
Of Clitermystra, for her lechery,
That falsely made her husband to die,
He read it with very good devotion.
He told me also for what occasion
Amphiorax at Thebes lost his life.
My husband had a legend of his wife,
Eriphilem, that for a brooch of gold
Has secretly unto the Greeks told
Where her husband hid him in a place,
For which he had at Thebes a sad fate.
Of Livia told he me, and of Lucie:
They both made their husbands to die,
That one for love, that other was for hate.
Livia her husband, on a late evening,
Has poisoned, because she was his foe;
Lucia, lecherous, loved her husband so much
That, so that he should always think upon her,
She gave him such a sort of love-drink
That he was dead before it was morning;
And thus always husbands have sorrow.
Then he told me how one Latumius
Complained unto his fellow Arrius
That in his garden grew such a tree
On which he said how his three wives 
Hanged themselves for the malice of their hearts 
`O dear brother,' this Arrius said,
`Give me a shoot of that same blessed tree, 
And in my garden shall it be planted.'
Of latter date, of wives has he read
That some have slain their husbands in their bed,
And let her lecher copulate with her all the night,
When the corpse lay in the floor flat on its back.
And some have driven nails in their brains,
While they slept, and thus they had them slain.
Some have given them poison in their drink.
He spoke more harm than heart may imagine,
And concerning this he knew of more proverbs
Than in this world there grow grass or herbs.
`Better is,' he said, `thy habitation
Be with a lion or a foul dragon,
Than with a woman accustomed to scold.
Better is,' he said, `to stay high in the roof,
Than with an angry wife down in the house;
They are so wicked and contrary,
They always hate what their husbands love.'
He said, `A woman casts their shame away,
When she casts off her undergarment'; and furthermore,
`A fair woman, unless she is also chaste,
Is like a gold ring in a sow's nose.'
Who would believe, or who would suppose,
The woe that in my heart was, and pain?
And when I saw he would never cease
Reading on this cursed book all night,
All suddenly have I plucked three leaves 
Out of his book, right as he read, and also
I with my fist so hit him on the cheek
That in our fire he fell down backwards.
And he leaped up as does a furious lion,
And with his fist he hit me on the head
That on the floor I lay as if I were dead.
And when he saw how still I lay,
He was frightened and would have fled on his way,
Until at the last out of my swoon I awoke.
`O! hast thou slain me, false thief?' I said,
`And for my land thus hast thou murdered me?
Before I am dead, yet will I kiss thee.'
And near he came, and kneeled gently down,
And said, `Dear sister Alisoun,
So help me God, I shall never (again) smite thee!
What I have done, it is thyself to blame (you drove me to it). 
Forgive it me, and that I beseech thee!'
And yet immediately I hit him on the cheek,
And said, `Thief, thus much am I avenged;
Now will I die, I may no longer speak.'
But at the last, with much care and woe,
We made an agreement between our two selves. 
He gave me all the control in my hand,
To have the governance of house and land,
And of his tongue, and of his hand also;
And made him burn his book immediately right then.
And when I had gotten unto me,
By mastery, all the sovereignty,
And that he said, `My own true wife,
Do as you please the rest of all thy life;
Guard thy honor, and guard also my reputation' --
After that day we never had an argument.
As God may help me, I was to him as kind
As any wife from Denmark unto India,
And also true, and so was he to me.
I pray to God, who sits in majesty,
So bless his soul for his mercy dear.
Now will I say my tale, if you will hear."
The Friar laughed, when he had heard all this;
"Now dame," he said, "as I may have joy or bliss,
This is a long preamble of a tale!"
And when the Summoner heard the Friar cry out,
"Lo," said the Summoner, "By God's two arms!
A friar will always intrude himself (in others' affairs).
Lo, good men, a fly and also a friar
Will fall in every dish and also every discussion.
What speakest thou of perambulation?
What! amble, or trot, or keep still, or go sit down!
Thou spoil our fun in this manner."
"Yes, wilt thou have it thus, sir Summoner?" said the Friar;
"Now, by my faith I shall, before I go,
Tell of a summoner such a tale or two
That all the folk shall laugh in this place."
"Now otherwise, Friar, I curse thy face,"
Said this Summoner, "and I curse myself,
Unless I tell tales two or three
Of friars before I come to Siitingbourne
That I shall make thy heart to mourn,
For well I know thy patience is gone."
Our Host cried "Peace! And that right now!"
And said, "Let the woman tell her tale.
You act like folk that are drunk on ale.
Do, dame, tell forth your tale, and that is best."
"All ready, sir," she said, "right as you please,
If I have permission of this worthy Friar."
"Yes, dame," he said, "tell forth, and I will hear."
In the old days of King Arthur,
Of whom Britons speak great honor,
This land was all filled full of supernatural creatures. 
The elf-queen, with her jolly company,
Danced very often in many a green mead.
This was the old belief, as I read;
I speak of many hundred years ago.
But now no man can see any more elves,
For now the great charity and prayers
Of licensed beggars and other holy friars,
That overrun every land and every stream,
As thick as specks of dust in the sun-beam,
Blessing halls, chambers, kitchens, bedrooms,
Cities, towns, castles, high towers,
Villages, barns, stables, dairies --
This makes it that there are no fairies.
For where an elf was accustomed to walk 
There walks now the licensed begging friar himself
In late mornings and in early mornings,
And says his morning prayers and his holy things
As he goes in his assigned district.
Women may go safely up and down.
In every bush or under every tree
There is no other evil spirit but he,
And he will not do them any harm except dishonor.
And so it happened that this king Arthur
Had in his house a lusty bachelor,
That on one day came riding from hawking,
And it happened that, alone as he was born,
He saw a maiden walking before him,
Of which maiden straightway, despite all she could do,
By utter force, he took away her maidenhead;
For which wrong was such clamor
And such demand for justice unto king Arthur
That this knight was condemned to be dead,
By course of law, and should have lost his head --
Perhaps such was the statute then --
Except that the queen and other ladies as well
So long prayed the king for grace
Until he granted him his life right there,
And gave him to the queen, all at her will,
To choose whether she would him save or put to death.
The queen thanks the king with all her might,
And after this she spoke thus to the knight,
When she saw her time, upon a day:
"Thou standest yet," she said, "in such condition,
That of thy life yet thou hast no assurance
I grant thee life, if thou canst tell me
What thing it is that women most desire.
Beware, and keep thy neck-bone from iron (axe)!
And if thou canst not tell it right now,
Yet I will give thee leave to go
A twelvemonth and a day, to seek to learn
A satisfactory answer in this matter;
And I will have, before thou go, a pledge 
To surrender thy body in this place."
Woe was this knight, and sorrowfully he sighs;
But what! He can not do all as he pleases.
And at the last he chose to leave
And come again, exactly at the year's end,
With such answer as God would provide him;
And takes his leave, and goes forth on his way.
He seeks every house and every place
Where he hopes to have the luck
To learn what thing women love most,
But he could not arrive in any region
Where he might find in this matter
Two creatures agreeing together.
Some said women love riches best,
Some said honor, some said gaiety,
Some rich clothing, some said lust in bed,
And frequently to be widow and wedded.
Some said that our hearts are most eased
When we are flattered and pleased.
He goes very near the truth, I will not lie.
A man shall win us best with flattery,
And with attentions and with solicitude
We are caught, every one of us.
And some say that we love best
To be free and do just as we please,
And that no man reprove us for our vices,
But say that we are wise and not at all silly.
For truly there is not one of us all,
If any one will scratch us on the sore spot, 
That we will not kick back, because he tells us the truth.
Try it, and whoever so does shall find it true;
For, be we never so vicious within,
We want to be considered wise and clean of sin.
And some say that we have great delight 
To be considered steadfast, and also (able to keep a) secret,
And in one purpose steadfastly to remain,
And not reveal things that men tell us.
But that tale is not worth a rake handle.
By God, we women can hide nothing;
Witness on Midas -- will you hear the tale?
Ovid, among other small matters, 
Said Midas had, under his long hair,
Two ass's ears, growing upon his head,
The which vice he hid as he best could
Very skillfully from every man's sight,
That, except for his wife, there knew of it no others.
He loved her most, and trusted her also;
He prayed her that to no creature
She should tell of his disfigurement.
She swore him, "Nay"; for all this world to win,
She would not do that dishonor or sin,
To make her husband have so foul a reputation.
She would not tell it for her own shame.
But nonetheless, she thought that she would die
If she should hide a secret so long;
She thought it swelled so sore about her heart
That necessarily some word must escape her;
And since she dared tell it to no man,
She ran down to a marsh close by --
Until she came there her heart was afire --
And as a bittern bumbles in the mire,
She laid her mouth down unto the water:
"Betray me not, thou water, with thy sound,"
She said; "to thee I tell it and no others;
My husband has two long asses ears!
Now is my heart all whole; now is it out.
I could no longer keep it, without doubt."
Here you may see, though we a time abide,
Yet out it must come; we can hide no secret.
The remnant of the tale if you will hear,
Read Ovid, and there you may learn it.
This knight, of whom my tale is in particular,
When he saw he might not come to that --
This is to say, what women love most --
Within his breast very sorrowful was the spirit.
But home he goes; he could not linger;
The day was come that homeward he must turn.
And in his way he happened to ride,
In all this care, near a forest side,
Where he saw upon a dance go
Ladies four and twenty, and yet more;
Toward the which dance he drew very eagerly,
In hope that he should learn some wisdom.
But certainly, before he came fully there,
Vanished was this dance, he knew not where.
He saw no creature that bore life,
Save on the green he saw sitting a woman --
There can no man imagine an uglier creature.
At the knight's coming this old wife did rise,
And said, "Sir knight, there lies no road out of here.
Tell me what you seek, by your faith!
Perhaps it may be the better;
These old folk know many things," she said.
"My dear mother," said this knight, "certainly
I am as good as dead unless I can say
What thing it is that women most desire.
If you could teach me, I would well repay you."
"Pledge me thy word here in my hand," she said,
"The next thing that I require of thee,
Thou shalt do it, if it lies in thy power,
And I will tell it to you before it is night."
"Have here my pledged word," said the knight, "I agree."
"Then," she said, "I dare me well boast
Thy life is safe, for I will stand thereby;
Upon my life, the queen will say as I.
Let's see which is the proudest of them all
That wears a kerchief or a hairnet
That dares say `nay' of what I shall teach thee.
Let us go forth without longer speech."
Then she whispered a message in his ear,
And commanded him to be glad and have no fear.
When they are come to the court, this knight
Said he had held his day, as he had promised,
And his answer was ready, as he said.
Very many a noble wife, and many a maid,
And many a widow, because they are wise,
The queen herself sitting as a justice,
Are assembled, to hear his answer;
And afterward this knight was commanded to appear.
Silence was commanded to every person,
And that the knight should tell in open court
What thing (it is) that worldly women love best.
This knight stood not silent as does a beast,
But to his question straightway answered
With manly voice, so that all the court heard it:
"My liege lady, without exception," he said,
"Women desire to have sovereignty
As well over her husband as her love,
And to be in mastery above him.
This is your greatest desire, though you kill me.
Do as you please; I am here subject to your will."
In all the court there was not wife, nor maid,
Nor widow that denied what he said,
But said that he was worthy to have his life.
And with that word up sprang the old woman,
Whom the knight saw sitting on the green:
"Mercy," she said, "my sovereign lady queen!
Before your court departs, do me justice.
I taught this answer to the knight;
For which he pledged me his word there,
The first thing that I would ask of him
He would do, if it lay in his power.
Before the court then I pray thee, sir knight,"
Said she, "that thou take me as thy wife,
For well thou know that I have saved thy life.
If I say false, say `nay', upon thy faith!"
This knight answered, "Alas and woe is me!
I know right well that such was my promise.
For God's love, choose a new request!
Take all my goods and let my body go."
"Nay, then," she said, "I curse both of us two!
For though I am ugly, and old, and poor
I would not for all the metal, nor for ore
That under earth is buried or lies above,
Have anything except that I were thy wife, and also thy love."
"My love?" he said, "nay, my damnation!
Alas, that any of my family
Should ever be so foully degraded!"
But all for naught; the end is this, that he
Constrained was; he must by necessity wed her,
And takes his old wife, and goes to bed.
Now would some men say, perhaps,
That because of my negligence I make no effort
To tell you the joy and all the rich display
That was at the (wedding) feast that same day.
To which thing shortly I shall answer:
I say there was no joy nor feast at all;
There was nothing but heaviness and much sorrow.
For he wedded her in private in the morning,
And all day after hid himself like an owl,
So woeful was he, his wife looked so ugly.
Great was the woe the knight had in his thought,
When he was brought to bed with his wife;
He wallows and he turns to and fro.
His old wife lay smiling evermore,
And said, "O dear husband, bless me!
Does every knight behave thus with his wife as you do?
Is this the law of king Arthur's house?
Is every knight of his so aloof?
I am your own love and your wife;
I am she who has saved your life,
And, certainly, I did you never wrong yet;
Why behave you thus with me this first night?
You act like a man who had lost his wit.
What is my offense? For God's love, tell it,
And it shall be amended, if I can."
"Amended?" said this knight, "Alas, nay, nay!
It will not be amended ever more.
Thou art so loathsome, and so old also,
And moreover descended from such low born lineage,
That little wonder is though I toss and twist about.
So would God my heart would burst!"
"Is this," she said, "the cause of your distress?"
"Yes, certainly," he said, "it is no wonder."
"Now, sir," she said, "I could amend all this,
If I pleased, before three days were past,
Providing that you might behave well towards me.
"But, since you speak of such nobility
As is descended out of old riches,
That therefore you should be noble men,
Such arrogance is not worth a hen.
Look who is most virtuous always,
In private and public, and most intends ever
To do the noble deeds that he can;
Take him for the greatest noble man.
Christ wants us to claim our nobility from him,
Not from our ancestors for their old riches.
For though they give us all their heritage,
For which we claim to be of noble lineage,
Yet they can not bequeath by any means
To any of us their virtuous living,
That made them be called noble men,
And commanded us to follow them in such matters.
"Well can the wise poet of Florence,
Who is called Dante, speak on this matter.
Lo, in such sort of rime is Dante's speech:
`Very seldom grows up from its small branches
Nobility of man, for God, of his goodness,
Wants us to claim our nobility from him';
For from our ancestors we can claim no thing 
Except temporal things, that may hurt and injure a man.
"Also every person knows this as well as I,
If nobility were planted naturally
Unto a certain lineage down the line,
Then in private and in public they would never cease
To do the just duties of nobility;
They could do no dishonor or vice.
"Take fire and bear it in the darkest house
Between this and the mount of Caucasus,
And let men shut the doors and go away;
Yet will the fire as brightly blaze and burn 
As if twenty thousand men might it behold;
Its natural function it will always hold,
On peril of my life (I say), until it dies.
"Here may you see well that nobility
Is not joined with possession,
Since folk not do behave as they should
Always, as does the fire, lo, in its nature.
For, God knows it, men may well often find
A lord's son doing shame and dishonor;
And he who will have praise for his noble birth,
Because he was born of a noble house
And had his noble and virtuous ancestors,
And will not himself do any noble deeds
Nor follow his noble ancestry that is dead,
He is not noble, be he duke or earl,
For churlish sinful deeds make a churl.
For nobility is nothing but renown
Of thy ancestors, for their great goodness,
Which is a thing not naturally part of thy person.
Thy nobility comes from God alone.
Then our true nobility comes from grace ;
It was not at all bequeathed to us with our social rank.
"Think how noble, as says Valerius,
Was that same Tullius Hostillius,
That out of poverty rose to high nobility.
Read Seneca, and read also Boethius;
There shall you see clearly that it is no doubt
That he is noble who does noble deeds.
And therefore, dear husband, I thus conclude:
Although it is so that my ancestors were rude,
Yet may the high God, and so hope I,
Grant me grace to live virtuously.
Then am I noble, when I begin
To live virtuously and abandon sin.
"And whereas you reprove me for poverty,
The high God, on whom we believe,
In voluntary poverty chose to live his life.
And certainly every man, maiden, or woman
Can understand that Jesus, heaven's king,
Would not choose a vicious form of living.
Glad poverty is an honest thing, certain;
This will Seneca and other clerks say.
Whoever considers himself satisfied with his poverty,
I consider him rich, although he had not a shirt.
He who covets is a poor person,
For he would have that which is not in his power;
But he who has nothing, nor covets to have anything,
Is rich, although you consider him but a knave.
True poverty, it rightly sings; 
Juvenal says of poverty merrily:
`The poor man, when he goes along the roadway,
Before the thieves he may sing and play.'
Poverty is a hateful good and, as I guess,
A very great remover of cares;
A great amender also of wisdom
To him that takes it in patience.
Poverty is this, although it may seem miserable:
A possession that no one will challenge.
Poverty very often, when a man is low,
Makes him know his God and also himself.
Poverty is an eye glass, as it seems to me,
Through which one may see his true friends.
And therefore, sir, since I do not injure you,
You (should) no longer reprove me for my poverty.
"Now, sir, of old age you reprove me;
And certainly, sir, though no authority
Were in any book, you gentlefolk of honor
Say that men should be courteous to an old person
And call him father, because of your nobility;
And authors shall I find, as I guess.
"Now where you say that I am ugly and old,
Than do not fear to be a cuckold;
For filth and old age, as I may prosper,
Are great guardians of chastity.
But nonetheless, since I know your delight,
I shall fulfill your worldly appetite.
"Choose now," she said, "one of these two things:
To have me ugly and old until I die,
And be to you a true, humble wife,
And never displease you in all my life,
Or else you will have me young and fair,
And take your chances of the crowd
That shall be at your house because of me,
Or in some other place, as it may well be.
Now choose yourself, whichever you please."
This knight deliberates and painfully sighs,
But at the last he said in this manner:
"My lady and my love, and wife so dear,
I put me in your wise governance;
Choose yourself which may be most pleasure
And most honor to you and me also.
I do not care which of the two,
For as it pleases you, is enough for me."
"Then have I gotten mastery of you," she said,
"Since I may choose and govern as I please?"
"Yes, certainly, wife," he said, "I consider it best."
"Kiss me," she said, "we are no longer angry,
For, by my troth, I will be to you both --
This is to say, yes, both fair and good.
I pray to God that I may die insane
Unless I to you be as good and true
As ever was wife, since the world was new.
And unless I am tomorrow morning as fair to be seen
As any lady, empress, or queen,
That is between the east and also the west,
Do with my life and death right as you please.
Cast up the curtain, look how it is."
And when the knight saw truly all this,
That she so was beautiful, and so young moreover,
For joy he clasped her in his two arms.
His heart bathed in a bath of bliss.
A thousand time in a row he did her kiss,
And she obeyed him in every thing
That might do him pleasure or enjoyment.
And thus they live unto their lives' end
In perfect joy; and Jesus Christ us send
Husbands meek, young, and vigorous in bed,
And grace to outlive them whom we wed;
And also I pray Jesus shorten their lives
That will not be governed by their wives;
And old and angry misers in spending,
God send them soon the very pestilence!
ALIGN=top></A></LEFT> Texts on this page prepared and maintained by L. D. Benson <A HREF="mailto:ldb@wjh.harvard.edu">(ldb@wjh.harvard.edu)</A> 
